**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1877%20St.%20Louis%20general%20strike\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

1877 St. Louis general strike
=============================

-   *The 1877 St. Louis general strike was one of the first general
    strikes in the United States.*

-   *It grew out of the Great Railroad Strike of 1877.*

The 1877 St. Louis general strike was one of the first general strikes
in the United States. It grew out of the Great Railroad Strike of 1877.
The strike was largely organized by the Knights of Labor and the
Marxist-leaning Workingmen's Party, the main radical political party of
the era.

The Long Depression and the Great Strikes
=========================================

-   *Violence began in Martinsburg, West Virginia and spread along the
    rail lines through Baltimore and on to several major cities and
    transportation hubs of the time, including Reading, Scranton and
    Shamokin, Pennsylvania; a bloodless general strike in St. Louis,
    Missouri; and a short lived uprising in Chicago, Illinois.*

-   *In mid-1877, tensions erupted in stoppages and civil unrest across
    the nation in what would become known as the Great Railroad Strike
    or the Great Strikes.*

The Long Depression, sparked in the United States by the Panic of 1873,
had extensive implications for US industry, closing more than a hundred
railroads in the first year and cutting construction of new rail lines
from 7,500 miles (12,100 km) of track in 1872 to 1,600 miles (2,600 km)
in 1875. Approximately 18,000 businesses failed between 1873 and 1875,
production in iron and steel dropped as much as 45 percent, and a
million or more lost their jobs. In 1876, 76 railroad companies went
bankrupt or entered receivership in the US alone, and the economic
impacts rippled throughout many economic sectors throughout the
industrialized world.

In mid-1877, tensions erupted in stoppages and civil unrest across the
nation in what would become known as the Great Railroad Strike or the
Great Strikes. Violence began in Martinsburg, West Virginia and spread
along the rail lines through Baltimore and on to several major cities
and transportation hubs of the time, including Reading, Scranton and
Shamokin, Pennsylvania; a bloodless general strike in St. Louis,
Missouri; and a short lived uprising in Chicago, Illinois. In the worst
case, rioting in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania left 61 dead and 124 injured.
Much of the city's center was burned, including more than a thousand
rail cars destroyed. What began as the peaceful actions of organized
labor attracted the masses of discontented and unemployed workers
spawned by the depression, along with others who took opportunistic
advantage of the chaos. In total, an estimated 100,000 workers
participated nationwide.

July 22 – 24, 1877
==================

-   *The machinists announced that while they were not going to strike,
    but would stop working in solidarity with the strikers.*

-   *The people of St. Louis were apprehensive about the strike, and
    many expected some sort of bloodshed.*

-   *The strike was compared by city officials to the Paris Commune
    of 1871.*

-   *At 12:00, a strike began in East St. Louis, and within hours
    strikers virtually controlled the city.*

In East St. Louis, Illinois, on July 22, train workers held a secret
meeting, and resolved to call for an increase in their wages, and strike
if their demands were not met. Following the secret meeting, an outdoor
meeting was held, with about 200 members of the Workingmen's Party
attending. The enthusiastic crowd supported various speakers who offered
their support to the workers. A third meeting was held that night, in
Turner's hall, limited to railroad workers. After several more speeches,
they further clarified the demands by adopting a series of resolutions:

The demand was made and rejected that same night. At 12:00, a strike
began in East St. Louis, and within hours strikers virtually controlled
the city. The following morning strikers announced they would to allow
passenger and mail trains through, but intended to stop all freight
traffic. The workers were initially described as "quiet and orderly",
and the companies made no effort to run freight trains. On the Chicago &
Alton, an effort was made to start a freight train, but it was
eventually stopped. At the Union Railway & Transit Company yards, one
stock train was allowed to cross the bridge, while employees of the
Transit company struck in East St. Louis, and did not in St. Louis. Even
after removing the wage reduction, workers at the Transit company
continued to strike. Throughout the day, many other major railroads did
not see strikes, and strikes were far less prevalent outside of East S.
Louis. Feed was allowed to be brought to livestock, and passenger trains
continued to be allowed through. The strike was compared by city
officials to the Paris Commune of 1871.

On the morning of July 24, the strikers resolved to not allow passenger
trains through. An eastbound train with 125 passengers was stopped, and
after about an hour of argument, the decision was made to let it
through. The next train that entered was decoupled from its passenger
cars. At 11:00 AM, a group of 25 strikers led by an Ohio and Mississippi
Railway engineer. entered the Union depot, the first time strikers were
outside of East St. Louis. They seized two Missouri Pacific Railroad
steam engines, and went to the Missouri Pacific engine shops. The 250
workers at the engine shops continued to work and could not be convinced
by the strikers to leave. The strikers then returned to the Union depot,
and stopped a train from leaving, allowing it to pass two hours later.

3,000 to 4,000 people gathered at the depot, and unrest continued to
gather, particularly at the announcement that six companies of infantry
were on route to St. Louis. The police cleared and ordered the salons
closed in the region around the depot. At 4:00 PM, flatcars loaded with
400 strikers arrived. They marched to the Missouri Pacific Shops,
arriving with about 2,000 people. The machinists announced that while
they were not going to strike, but would stop working in solidarity with
the strikers. The men then traveled to the North Missouri Railroad
track; and, taking an engine and ten flat cars, went to the North
Missouri's roundhouse and convinced the workers to join the strike.

As a result of the strike, various federal receivers and then Secretary
of the Interior Carl Schurz urged George W. McCrary to intervene. Schurz
wrote that "no United States Marshal, unless backed by Federal troops,
can restore order or protect men willing to work...the presence of
Federal troops will form a rallying point and do much to restore order."
John Pope was directed to protect railroads and promote peace. At 6:00
PM six companies (consisting of about 350 soldiers), led by Colonel
Jefferson C. Davis arrived from Fort Leavenworth. Davis stated that "I
have been ordered here with general instructions to protect the property
of the United States, and shall participate in no movement looking to
anything else without I have specific orders from army headquarters,"
and marched his soldiers to an arsenal barracks. Six additional
companies were directed to St. Louis from the 16th and 19th Infantry
regiments to leave posts in Kansas, Colorado, and the Oklahoma
Territory. Three arrived later on July 24, and the rest on July 25, for
a total of 42 officers and 410 soldiers. As the soldiers were only
directed to protect federal property, the strikers were largely
unaffected by the arrival of troops, and gathered at the Union depot,
where they would spend the night.

The people of St. Louis were apprehensive about the strike, and many
expected some sort of bloodshed. On the night of July 24, Communist
leaders held meetings across the city. Threats of burning newspaper
buildings were made, and processions of people marched through the
streets. The city government was reluctant to act, as they had less than
1,000 arms, and feared they could not effectively deal with the strike.
Their 360-man police force, while many were retained in readiness for
some sort of outbreak, "remained strangely inert during the upheaval."
After urging by Davis, efforts soon began, led by municipal authorities
and various prominent citizens, to raise a 5,000 man force.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.08415791776028in"}\
*The Four Courts building*

July 25 – 30, 1877
==================

-   *By August 1, the strike had ended in East St. Louis.*

-   *By Monday the 30, the strike was over in St. Louis.*

-   *The strikers were demoralized, and with the ending of the Chicago
    railroad strike of 1877, Illinois Governor Shelby Moore Cullom
    directed seven companies of Illinois National Guard troops to St.
    Louis.*

The following morning, action began around 9:00 am as a crowd of 1,500
people gathered in a marketplace. Largely composed of striking wire and
other material manufacturers, at 10:00, they marched from the St. Louis
City Hall to Turner Hall (where the executive committee of the
Workingmen's Party was meeting). Thirty minutes later, approximately 500
strikers marched to the levee, in an effort to get roustabouts to join
the strike. Strikers expected all manufacturing to halt by the end of
the day. By 10:00 pm, however, the men of the Laclede Gas Company had
reached an agreement with their employers, and returned to work.

On the morning of July 26, there was a mass meeting of coopers. They did
not resolve and return to work. 2,500 people gathered again at the Union
depot, though little occurred. During the morning, one train (of the
Toledo, Wabash and Western Railroad) was allowed to pass over the
bridge.Though Chicago & Alton employees sent trains, they were
eventually stopped. Due to fear of retribution, the Mississippi Pacific
offices were closed though the workers were not striking. A delegation
of strikers was sent to Cheltenham, where they ordered smelters and clay
workers to go on strike. The workers offered to continue work if
provided police protection, but the police refused the request. During
the strike, the city was virtually unpoliced, and a request to protect
private property made by the employers of the Union Street Railway was
also refused. Beef canners soon joined the strike. The Mayor of St.
Louis, Henry Overstolz, issued a proclamation warning strikers to not
destroy public property. He also announced the formation of a Committee
of Safety led by General Andrew J. Smith, Thomas T. Gantt and General
John S. Marmaduke.

Smith also led a 'Citizens Organization for the Protection of Property',
headquartered at the Four Courts building. After various meetings
throughout the day, the organization had membership numbering around
1,500 armed men. 50 men were placed on the city's steamer to patrol the
rivers. By noon of July 26, 10,000 citizens had joined the organization.
At 10:00 am, 2,000 men (composed of strikers and loafers) had marched
from Lucas market place to a manufacturing district, where they
dismantled Belcher's Sugar Refinery to prevent its 400 workers from
returning to work. The mob continued (despite many people leaving) to
dismantle a further 40 factories, flour mills or planing mills, and
forcing an additional 1,000 employees to stop working.

The rioters visited a disused chair factory under the presumption it was
active. A squad of police appeared and ordered the strikers out of the
factory. Several minutes after leaving the factory, it was discovered to
be on fire, in what was thought to be a case of arson. The factory and a
nearby lumber yard were completely destroyed. The mob was quickly
dispersed. Another group traveled to the levees, and forced all steamers
to increase the wages of steamboat and levee workers from sixty to
one-hundred percent. Throughout the day, most shops in the city were
closed, and a further group of 2,000 armed men were raised by the
sheriff. The Governor of Missouri, John S. Phelps, arrived, and began
helping to suppress disorder. Drilling of the citizens was carried out
at the Four Courts building throughout the day.

At around 10:30\[when?\], a large crowd appeared at the Four Courts
building, and began harassing guards patrolling the buildings perimeter.
A detachment of police drove the men back and arrested many of the mob.
The rioters were made calmer by the information that Davis had increased
his troops to 600 men, and stood ready to respond to a call for help
from the governor or mayor.

On the morning of the 27, city authorities began an attempt to stop the
mobs. The Union depot was still held by strikers, and at 11:00 am, a
battalion of 400 men was dispatched to retake the depot. They caught the
strikers by surprise, and ended interference with trains. A mob soon
began to gather, and by 2:00 pm, over 2,000 men had gathered. After
ignoring calls issued by the mayor urging the group to disperse, 50
mounted police, 500 members of the Citizens Guard and two National Guard
companies were sent to break up the mob and arrest its leaders. At 2:30,
the force left Four Courts, led by John D. Stevenson and accompanied by
Overstolz. At 3:00, the 'executive committee' leading the strike was
warned about the force, and fled. The police charged the crowd (by then
3,000 people), and in five minutes the mob was successfully broken up.
Seventy men were arrested from the top floor of Schuler Hall. Protection
was also offered to various shops that desired to begin operating.

On the night of the 27, the Workingmen's party held three meetings, two
of which did not occur, and the third was broken up by the police before
it started. By July 28, 3,000 vigilantes had been raised. The force,
coupled with periodic displays of army soldiers, helped to subdue the
strikers. The following days passed with little disturbance and many of
the leaders of the strike were arrested. By Monday the 30, the strike
was over in St. Louis.

Many of the strikers had grouped in East St. Louis after being broken up
on the 27. They resolved to further prevent any trains from passing;
however, a United States Marshal requested and received a force of
troops to protect the Ohio and Mississippi Railway and St. Louis &
Southeastern Railway. The strikers were demoralized, and with the ending
of the Chicago railroad strike of 1877, Illinois Governor Shelby Moore
Cullom directed seven companies of Illinois National Guard troops to St.
Louis. By August 1, the strike had ended in East St. Louis.

See also
========

-   *Great Southwest railroad strike of 1886*

-   *Great Railroad Strike of 1922*

Great Railroad Strike of 1922

Great Southwest railroad strike of 1886

List of worker deaths in United States labor disputes

List of incidents of civil unrest in the United States

Timeline of labor issues and events

References
==========

Notes
=====

Sources
=======

Bibliography
============

Further reading
===============

-   *"Reign of the Rabble: the St. Louis General Strike of 1877" by
    David T. Burbank, published by August M. Kelley (1966)*

-   *"'Not Only the Ruling Classes to Overcome, but Also the So-Called
    Mob': Class, Skill and Community in the St. Louis General Strike of
    1877".*

"Reign of the Rabble: the St. Louis General Strike of 1877" by David T.
Burbank, published by August M. Kelley (1966)

Philip S. Foner, The Great Labor Uprising of 1877, New York: Monad
Press, 1977.

David Roediger (1985). "'Not Only the Ruling Classes to Overcome, but
Also the So-Called Mob': Class, Skill and Community in the St. Louis
General Strike of 1877". Journal of Social History. 19.
doi:10.1353/jsh/19.2.213. JSTOR 3787468.

External links
==============

-   *Media related to 1877 St. Louis general strike at Wikimedia
    Commons*

Media related to 1877 St. Louis general strike at Wikimedia Commons
