**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1957\_UCI\_Road\_World\_Championships\_%E2%80%93\_Men%27s\_road\_race\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

1957 UCI Road World Championships – Men's road race
===================================================

-   *The men's road race at the 1957 UCI Road World Championships took
    place in Waregem.*

The men's road race at the 1957 UCI Road World Championships took place
in Waregem. The course comprised 12 laps around 23.8-kilometre route,
making a total distance of 285.6 km.

Riders
======

-   *Netherlands: Wim Van Est, Wout Wagtmans, Van de Pluym, Dejonghe.*

-   *Belgium: Marcel Janssens, Germain Derycke, Raymond Impanis, Julien
    Schepens, Leon Van Daele, Fred De Bruyne, Rik Van Looy, Rik Van
    Steenbergen.*

Belgium: Marcel Janssens, Germain Derycke, Raymond Impanis, Julien
Schepens, Leon Van Daele, Fred De Bruyne, Rik Van Looy, Rik Van
Steenbergen.

France: Louison Bobet, Jacques Anquetil, André Darrigade, Bernard
Gauthier, Huot, Jean Forestier, Dupont.

Italy: Gastone Nencini, Baldini, Boni, Defilippis, Padovan, Pierino
Baffi.

Netherlands: Wim Van Est, Wout Wagtmans, Van de Pluym, Dejonghe.

Other countries: Gaul, Schmitz, Junkermann, Robinson, ...

The race
========

-   *At that time, it looked like Rik II (Rik Van Looy) would become the
    new World Champion, but Janssens got cramps.*

-   *Rik Van Steenbergen didn't react, but Bobet did.*

-   *Then Marcel Janssens reacted, together with Rik Van Looy they
    closed the gap.*

-   *Because Bobet was a faster sprinter and would win from De Bruyne,
    there was a reaction of Van Steenbergen.*

In the penultimate lap Wout Wagtmans attacked. He had a gap of 1 minute
at it maximum. Then Marcel Janssens reacted, together with Rik Van Looy
they closed the gap. Van Looy and Janssens left Wagtmans behind. In the
final lap the duo had a gap op 30 secondes. At that time, it looked like
Rik II (Rik Van Looy) would become the new World Champion, but Janssens
got cramps.

In the peloton Louison Bobet en Jacques Anquetil were leading the chase.
Before Anzegem they could catch the two leaders. Attack of Fred De
Bruyne. Rik Van Steenbergen didn't react, but Bobet did. There was a new
leading group: the Frenchman Bobet and the Belgian De Bruyne. Because
Bobet was a faster sprinter and would win from De Bruyne, there was a
reaction of Van Steenbergen. Together with Van Looy, Jacques Anquetil
and André Darrigade he could close the gap. A group of six rides could
sprint for the victory.

At 400m of the finish Darrigade started the sprint. At 150m Rik Van
Steenbergen came nearby and he won the sprint with six. Rik I won for
the third time the World Championship. For the first time he succeeded
in his own country.

Final classification
====================

References
==========

-   *Results*

Results
