**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A.%20D.%20King\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

A. D. King
==========

-   *He was the younger brother of Martin Luther King Jr.*

Alfred Daniel Williams "A. D." King (July 30, 1930 – July 21, 1969) was
an American Baptist minister and civil rights activist. He was the
younger brother of Martin Luther King Jr.

Early life
==========

-   *He was a son of Reverend Martin Luther King Sr. (1899–1984), and
    Alberta Williams King (1904–1974), the youngest of their three
    children (the other two being Willie Christine, born September 11,
    1927, and Martin Luther King Jr., born January 15, 1929).*

-   *In 1959, King graduated from Morehouse College.*

-   *Alfred Daniel Williams King was born July 30, 1930, in Atlanta,
    Georgia.*

Alfred Daniel Williams King was born July 30, 1930, in Atlanta, Georgia.
He was a son of Reverend Martin Luther King Sr. (1899–1984), and Alberta
Williams King (1904–1974), the youngest of their three children (the
other two being Willie Christine, born September 11, 1927, and Martin
Luther King Jr., born January 15, 1929). In contrast to his peacemaking
brother, Martin, A. D.—according to his father—was "a little rough at
times" and "let his toughness build a reputation throughout our
neighborhood".:126 Less interested in academics than his siblings, King
started a family of his own while still a teenager and attended college
later in his life. He was married on June 17, 1950, to Naomi Ruth Barber
(born November 17, 1932), with whom he had six children: Alveda, Alfred
II, Derek, Darlene, James and Vernon.

Although as a youth King had strongly resisted his father's ministerial
urgings, he eventually began assisting his father at Ebenezer Baptist
Church. In 1959, King graduated from Morehouse College. That same year,
he left Ebenezer Baptist to become pastor of Mount Vernon First Baptist
Church in Newnan, Georgia.

Involvement in the Civil Rights Movement
========================================

-   *King was arrested along with his brother Martin and 70 others while
    participating in an October 1960 lunch-counter sit-in in Atlanta.*

-   *King tended to stay in his brother's shadow and many people never
    even knew that Martin Luther King Jr. had a brother.*

-   *However, unlike his brother, King remained mostly outside the
    media’s spotlight.*

-   *On May 11, 1963, King’s house was bombed.*

King was arrested along with his brother Martin and 70 others while
participating in an October 1960 lunch-counter sit-in in Atlanta. In
1963, King became a leader of the Birmingham campaign, while pastoring
at First Baptist Church of Ensley in Birmingham, Alabama. On May 11,
1963, King’s house was bombed. In August, after a bomb exploded at the
home of a prominent black lawyer in downtown Birmingham, outraged
citizens, intent on revenge, poured into the city streets. While rocks
were being thrown at gathering policemen and the situation escalated,
King climbed on top of a parked car and shouted to the rioters in an
attempt to quell their fury: "My friends, we have had enough problems
tonight. If you're going to kill someone, then kill me; ... Stand up for
your rights, but with nonviolence."\
Like his brother, King was a staunch believer in the importance of
maintaining nonviolence in direct action campaigns. However, unlike his
brother, King remained mostly outside the media’s spotlight. As one of
his associates said, "Not being in the limelight never seemed to affect
him, but because he stayed in the background, many people never knew
that he was deeply involved, too." King tended to stay in his brother's
shadow and many people never even knew that Martin Luther King Jr. had a
brother. He supported his brother throughout the movement but never took
the limelight away from him.

King often traveled with his brother and was with him in Memphis on
April 4, 1968, when his brother was shot dead. King was in the room
directly beneath Martin's at the Lorraine Hotel when the gun blast went
off, and when he saw his brother lying mortally wounded, he had to be
restrained by others due to the shock and overwhelming emotion he was
experiencing.

Later life and death
====================

-   *After Martin's death, King returned to Ebenezer Baptist Church,
    where, in September 1968, he was installed as co-pastor.*

-   *His father, Martin Luther King Sr., said in his autobiography,
    "Alveda had been up the night before, she said, talking with her
    father and watching a television movie with him.*

-   *While there, King continued to fight for civil rights and was
    successful in a 1968 campaign for an open housing ordinance.*

For the last part of his life, he suffered from alcoholism and
depression.\
In 1965, King moved to Louisville, Kentucky, where he became pastor at
Zion Baptist Church. While there, King continued to fight for civil
rights and was successful in a 1968 campaign for an open housing
ordinance. After his brother's assassination in April 1968, there was
speculation that King might become the president of the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC). King, however, made no effort to
assume his deceased brother’s role, although he did continue to be
active in the Poor People's Campaign and in other work on behalf of
SCLC.

After Martin's death, King returned to Ebenezer Baptist Church, where,
in September 1968, he was installed as co-pastor. He was praised by his
father as "an able preacher, a concerned, loving pastor".

On July 21, 1969, nine days before his 39th birthday, King was found
dead in the swimming pool at his home. The cause of his death was listed
as an accidental drowning. However, it is likely that the stress of his
brother's high-profile activist work and the trauma of his assassination
exacerbated A.D.'s heart problems, of which there was a family history
(three of A.D.'s children later died of heart attacks: Alfred II in
1986, Darlene at age 20 on July 9, 1976, and Vernon at the age 49 on May
1, 2009; his father, Martin Luther King Sr., also died of a heart attack
in 1984).

His father, Martin Luther King Sr., said in his autobiography, "Alveda
had been up the night before, she said, talking with her father and
watching a television movie with him.:192 He'd seemed unusually
quiet...and not very interested in the film. But he had wanted to stay
up and Alveda left him sitting in an easy chair, staring at the TV, when
she went off to bed... I had questions about A.D.'s death and I still
have them now. He was a good swimmer. Why did he drown? I don't know – I
don't know that we will ever know what happened." Naomi King, his widow,
said, "There is no doubt in my mind that the system killed my husband."

External links
==============

-   *"A. D. King".*

"A. D. King". Find a Grave. Retrieved 2016-01-05..mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

References
==========
