**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A.%20Maceo%20Smith\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

A. Maceo Smith
==============

-   *Antonio Maceo Smith (April 16, 1903 - December 19, 1977) was a
    pioneer civil rights leader in Dallas, Texas, whose years of
    activism with the National Association for the Advancement of
    Colored People (NAACP) and other civil rights and community groups
    led Texans to dub him "Mr. Civil Rights" and "Mr. Organization".*

Antonio Maceo Smith (April 16, 1903 - December 19, 1977) was a pioneer
civil rights leader in Dallas, Texas, whose years of activism with the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and
other civil rights and community groups led Texans to dub him "Mr. Civil
Rights" and "Mr. Organization".

Early life and education
========================

-   *Smith was awarded an MBA at New York University in 1928.*

-   *Antonio Maceo Smith was born in Texarkana, Texas, where he attended
    segregated schools.*

-   *His parents were Howell and Winnie Smith.*

Antonio Maceo Smith was born in Texarkana, Texas, where he attended
segregated schools. His parents were Howell and Winnie Smith.

Smith graduated with an AB in 1924 from Fisk University, a historically
black university in Nashville, Tennessee where he would go on to be
honored as Alumnus of the Year in 1949. Smith was awarded an MBA at New
York University in 1928. He earned further master's degrees in economics
and business law at Columbia University.

Careers in entrepreneurship and public service
==============================================

-   *In 1933, Smith became the first executive secretary of the Dallas
    Negro Chamber of Commerce, where he spearheaded voter registration
    drives.*

-   *Smith first owned an advertising agency in New York City, and then
    a real estate firm in Texarkana.*

-   *In 1932, he moved to Dallas, where he taught business
    administration in the segregated Dallas public schools and published
    a weekly black newspaper, the Dallas Express.*

Smith first owned an advertising agency in New York City, and then a
real estate firm in Texarkana. In 1932, he moved to Dallas, where he
taught business administration in the segregated Dallas public schools
and published a weekly black newspaper, the Dallas Express.

In 1933, Smith became the first executive secretary of the Dallas Negro
Chamber of Commerce, where he spearheaded voter registration drives. He
was appointed as the deputy director of the Hall of Negro Life at the
Texas Centennial Exposition in 1936, and later that year wed Fannie
Fletcher. Turning from entrepreneurship to public service, in 1937 Smith
became an administrative aide in the Federal Housing Administration
(FHA). He was appointed regional relations advisor for Region VI in the
United States Housing Authority in 1939. He went on to become assistant
regional administrator for the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, and retired in 1972.

Civil Rights activism and community involvement
===============================================

-   *Smith co-chaired the Biracial Committee for the City of Dallas,
    where he helped lead the city's desegregation.*

-   *Smith also fought against school segregation in a legal campaign
    that led to Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950), a case that
    paved the way for Brown v. Board of Education.*

-   *Smith fought against Texas' white primary system, which
    disenfranchised nonwhite voters.*

Smith fought against Texas' white primary system, which disenfranchised
nonwhite voters. That campaign led to the landmark U.S. Supreme Court
decision in Smith v. Allwright, 321 U.S. 649 (1944), that did away with
white primaries nationwide. Smith also fought against school segregation
in a legal campaign that led to Sweatt v. Painter, 339 U.S. 629 (1950),
a case that paved the way for Brown v. Board of Education. Smith
co-chaired the Biracial Committee for the City of Dallas, where he
helped lead the city's desegregation. He served on the NAACP's national
board of directors from 1953 until 1957, when he was forced to resign by
his FHA supervisors. He was also a leader in the Texas State Negro
Chamber of Commerce, the Texas Council of Negro Organizations, the
Dallas Urban League, the Texas State Progressive Voters League, the
Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, the Rotary Club of Dallas, the Knights of
Pythias, the New Hope Baptist Church, and at Bishop College.

Local legacy
============

-   *A. Maceo Smith New Tech High School and the A. Maceo Smith Federal
    Building, both in Dallas, are named for Smith.*

A. Maceo Smith New Tech High School and the A. Maceo Smith Federal
Building, both in Dallas, are named for Smith.

See also
========

-   *History of the African Americans in Dallas-Fort Worth*

History of the African Americans in Dallas-Fort Worth

Notes
=====

References
==========
