**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron%20Henry\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Aaron Henry
===========

-   *He was one of the founders of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic
    Party which tried to seat their delegation at the 1964 Democratic
    National Convention.*

-   *Aaron Henry (July 2, 1922 – May 19, 1997) was an American civil
    rights leader, politician, and head of the Mississippi branch of the
    NAACP.*

Aaron Henry (July 2, 1922 – May 19, 1997) was an American civil rights
leader, politician, and head of the Mississippi branch of the NAACP. He
was one of the founders of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
which tried to seat their delegation at the 1964 Democratic National
Convention.

Early life
==========

-   *Aaron Henry was born in Dublin, Mississippi to parents Ed and
    Mattie Henry, who worked as sharecroppers.*

-   *In 1959, Henry was elected president of the Mississippi
    organization, and served in the NAACP for decades.*

-   *Henry used the G.I.*

-   *Henry's parents believed education to be essential for the future
    of Henry and his family; therefore, he was able to attend the
    all-black Coahoma County Agricultural High School.*

Aaron Henry was born in Dublin, Mississippi to parents Ed and Mattie
Henry, who worked as sharecroppers. While growing up, he worked on the
Flowers brothers' plantation, which was twenty miles east of Clarksdale
in Coahoma County. Henry detested everything about growing cotton
because of the hardships that it brought upon the African Americans
working on the plantation. Henry's parents believed education to be
essential for the future of Henry and his family; therefore, he was able
to attend the all-black Coahoma County Agricultural High School. After
graduating from high school, Henry worked as a night clerk at a motel to
earn money for college, but ended up enlisting in the Army. Three years
in the army taught him that racial discrimination and segregation were
common, many instances of which he described to Robert Penn Warren for
the book Who Speaks for the Negro?. At the same time, it confirmed his
feelings that the segregation was worse in his home state. He decided
that he would work for equality and justice for black Americans as soon
as he returned home after the war. When he returned to Clarksdale in
1946, a Progressive Voters' League had been formed to work for the
implementation of the 1944 Supreme Court decision abolishing white
primacy.

As a veteran, Henry was interested in the decision that the Mississippi
legislature had exempted returning veterans from paying the poll tax.
Under the poll tax laws, a person had to have paid his poll tax for two
years prior to the time that he voted. Therefore, he tried to get black
Mississippians to go down to the courthouse to register to vote.
However, several veterans, who were non-white, were unable to register.
When Henry went to the circuit clerk's office to register, he was
rejected, as had been other black Americans. The clerk asked Henry to
bring a certificate showing that he was exempt from the poll tax.
Although he brought the certificate, the clerk said that Henry still
needed to pass various tests to show that he was qualified to vote. He
was finally able to register to vote after he read several sections of
the state constitution and went satisfactorily through more tests. Henry
used the G.I. Bill, a law that provided educational benefits for World
War II veterans, to enroll in the pharmacy school at Xavier University.
When he graduated in 1950 with a pharmaceutical degree, he married
Noelle Michael and went into his own pharmacy business. As a businessman
in Clarksdale, he became involved in local and state activities,
particularly events such as African-American voter registration. He
decided to organize an NAACP branch in Clarksdale because of the
incident where two black girls were raped by two white men who were
subsequently judged not guilty. W.A. Higgins, who was the principal of
the black high school and already a member of NAACP, made the
suggestion, and the NAACP national headquarters encouraged Henry and
Higgins to organize a local branch of the NAACP. In 1959, Henry was
elected president of the Mississippi organization, and served in the
NAACP for decades. Henry became close friends with Medgar Evers, who
worked as a secretary for the NAACP in 1950. On June 12, 1963, Evers was
assassinated in his driveway in Jackson, Mississippi and his
assassination had a great impact on Henry.

Regional Council of Negro Leadership
====================================

-   *Henry headed the RCNL's committee on "Separate but equal" which
    zeroed in on the need to guarantee the "equal."*

-   *The RCNL promoted a program of civil rights, voting rights,
    self-help, and business ownership.*

-   *In 1951, Henry was a founding member of the Regional Council of
    Negro Leadership (RCNL).*

-   *Henry aided the RCNL's boycott of service stations that failed to
    provide restrooms for blacks.*

In 1951, Henry was a founding member of the Regional Council of Negro
Leadership (RCNL). The main instigator and head of the organization was
Dr. T.R.M. Howard, a prominent black surgeon, fraternal organization
leader, and entrepreneur in the all-black town of Mound Bayou,
Mississippi.

The RCNL promoted a program of civil rights, voting rights, self-help,
and business ownership. Instead of starting from the “grass roots," it
sought to “reach the masses through their chosen leaders” by harnessing
the talents of blacks with a proven record in business, the professions,
education, and the church. Henry headed the RCNL's committee on
"Separate but equal" which zeroed in on the need to guarantee the
"equal."

Other key members of the RCNL included Amzie Moore, an NAACP activist
and gas station owner from Cleveland, Mississippi and Medgar Evers, who
sold insurance for Dr. Howard in Mound Bayou. Henry aided the RCNL's
boycott of service stations that failed to provide restrooms for blacks.
As part of this campaign, the RCNL distributed an estimated twenty
thousand bumper stickers with the slogan “Don't Buy Gas Where You Can't
Use the Rest Room." Beginning in 1953, it directly challenged separate
but equal policies and demanded integration of schools.

Henry participated in the RCNL's annual meetings in Mound Bayou between
1952 and 1955, which often attracted crowds of over ten thousand.

Frequently a target of racist violence, Henry was arrested in Clarksdale
repeatedly, and in one famous incident was chained to the rear of a city
garbage truck and led through the streets of Clarksdale to jail.

Civil rights movement activism
==============================

-   *He started the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) and the
    Council of Federated Organizations (COFO).*

-   *While Henry remained active in the RCNL until its demise in the
    early 1960s, he also joined the Mississippi branch of the NAACP in
    1954 and eventually worked his way up to state president in 1959.*

While Henry remained active in the RCNL until its demise in the early
1960s, he also joined the Mississippi branch of the NAACP in 1954 and
eventually worked his way up to state president in 1959. He started the
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) and the Council of Federated
Organizations (COFO). In 1961 he organized a boycott of stores in the
Clarksdale, Mississippi area that discriminated against African
Americans both as customers and employees. He chaired delegations of
Loyalist Democrats to the 1968 and 1972 Democratic National Conventions.

In 1962, he was arrested for picking up an eighteen-year-old young man
from Memphis, Tennessee. By 1968, after several appeals, the charge was
not voided. In 1972, he was arrested again for soliciting sodomy from
two undercover policemen.

Freedom Vote Campaign
=====================

-   *After this campaign, Henry helped to create the Mississippi Freedom
    Democratic Party to address civil rights in Mississippi.*

While Henry served as president of COFO in 1962, he made an effort to
organize the 1963 Freedom Ballot, which was the mock participation in
the state gubernatorial election in November 1963. Henry worked this
campaign with Allard K. Lowenstein, and they thought that showing black
voters' willingness to vote in the mock election would make the nation
realize that black Americans would in fact participate in the electoral
process if given the opportunity. In this mock election, Henry was the
candidate for governor, and Edwin King, who was a white Methodist
minister at Tougaloo College in Jackson, was candidate for lieutenant
governor. With Bob Moses, who managed the campaign, Henry and King tried
to raise awareness of how Paul B. Johnson Jr. and Rubel Phillips, who
were candidates of the actual election in 1963, ignored the Freedom Vote
campaign and potential strength of black Americans' will to vote. Since
they had only little experience in the political field, Henry and King
needed people who knew about political elections. At that time, Joe
Lieberman, who was an editor of the Yale Daily News, was in Mississippi
to work with a series of reports on the activities and programs of SNCC.
Lieberman found the Freedom Vote Campaign interesting, so he spread the
word at Yale about what type of help the campaign would need. After a
few weeks, students from Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, and Fordham came to
help with the campaign. With their participation, the Freedom Vote
Campaign gained enough awareness and was reported in a newspaper, "The
Free Press", by Bill Minor and R. L. T. Smith. To tabulate the result of
the campaign, ballot boxes were placed in churches, business, and homes.
Voting took place over a whole weekend so that many church congregations
could vote at Sunday services. Although there were incidents where
several voters were arrested, the campaign finished as a great success
in demonstrating the willingness of African Americans to vote, with the
participation of more than eighty thousand people. Within a week of the
freedom election, college volunteers by Lowenstein's efforts made plans
for a massive influx for Freedom Summer in 1964. The campaign also
encouraged Paul Johnson to hint at a change in Mississippi's official
line on race. After this campaign, Henry helped to create the
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party to address civil rights in
Mississippi.

Later life
==========

-   *Henry was elected to the Mississippi House of Representatives in
    1982, holding the seat until 1996.*

Henry was elected to the Mississippi House of Representatives in 1982,
holding the seat until 1996. He was a friend of powerful chairman of the
U.S. Senate James Eastland. He died in 1997 of congestive heart failure
at a hospital near his home in Clarksdale, following a stroke.

References
==========

-   *Howard's Fight for Civil Rights and Economic Power.*

-   *Aaron Henry with Constance W. Curry, Aaron Henry: The Fire Ever
    Burning, Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2000.*

-   *Local People: the Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi.*

-   *John Dittmer, Local People: the Struggle for Civil Rights in
    Mississippi (1994 book).*

Beito, David and Linda (2009). Black Maverick: T.R.M. Howard's Fight for
Civil Rights and Economic Power. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
ISBN 978-0-252-03420-6.

Dittmer, John (1994). Local People: the Struggle for Civil Rights in
Mississippi. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02102-9.

John Dittmer, Local People: the Struggle for Civil Rights in Mississippi
(1994 book).

Aaron Henry with Constance W. Curry, Aaron Henry: The Fire Ever Burning,
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2000.

Charles M. Payne, I've Got the Light of Freedom: The Organizing
Tradition and the Mississippi Freedom Struggle (1995 book).

External links
==============

-   *Oral History Interview with Aaron Henry from Oral Histories of the
    American South*

-   *SNCC Digital Gateway: Aaron Henry, Documentary website created by
    the SNCC Legacy Project and Duke University, telling the story of
    the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee & grassroots
    organizing from the inside-out*

-   *Oral History Interview with Aaron Henry, from the Lyndon Baines
    Johnson Library*

SNCC Digital Gateway: Aaron Henry, Documentary website created by the
SNCC Legacy Project and Duke University, telling the story of the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee & grassroots organizing from
the inside-out

Oral History Interview with Aaron Henry from Oral Histories of the
American South

The African American Registry

Oral History Interview with Aaron Henry, from the Lyndon Baines Johnson
Library
