**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ace\_Ventura%3A\_When\_Nature\_Calls\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls
==============================

-   *Jim Carrey reprises his role as the title character Ace Ventura, a
    detective who specializes in retrieval of tame and captive animals.*

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (also known as Ace Ventura 2: When
    Nature Calls) is a 1995 American detective comedy film and the
    sequel to Ace Ventura: Pet Detective (1994).*

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls (also known as Ace Ventura 2: When Nature
Calls) is a 1995 American detective comedy film and the sequel to Ace
Ventura: Pet Detective (1994). Jim Carrey reprises his role as the title
character Ace Ventura, a detective who specializes in retrieval of tame
and captive animals. Ian McNeice, Simon Callow, and Sophie Okonedo
co-star. Tommy Davidson, who co-starred with Carrey on the show In
Living Color, makes a cameo appearance in the film.

The film was written and directed by Carrey's close friend Steve
Oedekerk, who had also collaborated in the production and as a character
consultant for the first film.

Plot
====

-   *Because Ace is loathed at the monastery, the Grand Abbot gives Ace
    excuses to justify his departure, and sends him off with Greenwall.*

-   *Ace also befriends the tribal prince, Ouda, who assists Ace.*

-   *Cadby escapes with the bat in a car, but Ace follows him in a
    monster truck.*

-   *Ouda calls him the "White Devil" to give Ace more time, and Cadby
    is pursued by both tribes.*

In the Himalayas, after a failed rescue mission results in a raccoon
falling to its death (a parody of Cliffhanger), Ace Ventura has an
emotional breakdown and joins a Tibetan monastery. Once he has
recovered, he is approached by Fulton Greenwall, a British correspondent
working for a provincial consulate in the fictional African country of
Nibia. Because Ace is loathed at the monastery, the Grand Abbot gives
Ace excuses to justify his departure, and sends him off with Greenwall.

Greenwall is subjected to Ventura's eccentric behavior when he starts
mimicking different mating calls, and his dangerous driving when they
head off to Africa, warning him about the hostility of eastern lowland
gorillas as it is mating season. Greenwall wants Ventura to find the
Great White bat 'Shikaka', a sacred animal of the Wachati tribe, which
disappeared shortly after being offered as dowry of the Wachati
Princess, who is set to wed the Wachootoo Prince in a marriage of state.
After arriving in Nibia and meeting with consul Vincent Cadby, Ace
begins his investigation, but must overcome his intense fear of bats in
order to succeed.

Accompanied by his capuchin monkey, Spike, Ace begins his search for the
missing bat. He eventually befriends the tribe's princess, who tries to
seduce Ace. However, Ace admits his oath to clerical celibacy, but
quietly masturbates in a hut afterwards. Ace also befriends the tribal
prince, Ouda, who assists Ace. Ace's investigation involves eliminating
obvious suspects—animal traders, poachers, and a Safari park owner among
others—and enduring the growing escalations of threat between the
Wachati and the Wachootoo. After being attacked with drugged blow-darts,
Ace suspects the medicine-man of the Wachootoo of taking the bat, as he
strongly disapproves of the wedding. He travels to the Wachootoo tribal
village, with Ouda translating the chief's words rather poorly. The
Wachootoo mistake Ace as the "White Devil", and have him go through many
dangerous and humiliating challenges to gain their trust. He eventually
does when his pain makes the chief, entire tribe, and even Ouda laugh
for the first time in years. Despite this, if the bat is not returned in
time, the Wachootoo will declare war on the Wachati tribe. As a last
joke, Ace is shot in the butt by a non-drugged blow-dart by the Chief.
As he and Ouda walk back to the village, Ace realizes the dart he was
shot with earlier is not the same as the one he was just shot
with—meaning the Wachootoo didn't take Shikaka. He eventually finds two
Australian poachers with the bat, and he distracts them by mimicking a
Silverback mating call. Unfortunately, they don't fall for it and shoot
the initial darts into him and take him away.

After coming to, Ace tries to figure out how the poachers are involved
with the war between the tribes. Confused by the case, Ace consults the
Grand Abbot via astral projection. Advised by the Abbot, Ace deduces
that Cadby has taken the bat and hired Ace to divert suspicion from
himself, having planned to let the tribes destroy each other so that he
can then take possession of the numerous bat caves containing guano to
sell as fertilizer worth billions. When Ace confronts Cadby, he learns
he was hired as Cadby's alibi, and is arrested by tribal security chief
Hitu. Ace calls an African elephant to escape, and summons herds of
jungle animals to destroy Cadby's house. Cadby tries to shoot Ace, but
is stopped by Greenwall who punches him in the face. Cadby escapes with
the bat in a car, but Ace follows him in a monster truck. Ace destroys
Cadby's car, leaving the bat cage lodged in a tree.

Ace, despite his chronic fear of bats, bravely yet dramatically returns
the bat just as the tribes are about to meet on the battlefield. Cadby,
watching nearby, is discovered by Ouda. Ouda calls him the "White Devil"
to give Ace more time, and Cadby is pursued by both tribes. After
escaping, he breathes deeply and heavily, then encounters a female
amorous silverback eastern lowland gorilla that mistakes his breathing
for a mating call and he is subsequently raped by the ape. The Princess
is married to the Prince, who is revealed to be the man who humiliated
Ace during one of the Wachootoo tribal challenges earlier. Moments
later, it is discovered that the young bride is no longer a virgin,
apparently on Ace's account. Despite this, peace between the
once-separate tribes is achieved, when everyone joins together and
furiously chases after Ace.

Cast
====

-   *Jim Carrey as Ace Ventura*

Jim Carrey as Ace Ventura

Ian McNeice as Fulton Greenwall

Simon Callow as Vincent Cadby

Maynard Eziashi as Ouda

Bob Gunton as Burton Quinn

Damon Standifer as the Wachati Chief

Sophie Okonedo as the Wachati Princess

Arsenio 'Sonny' Trinidad as Ashram Monk

Danny D. Daniels as Wachootoo Shaman

Andrew Steel as Mick Katie

Bruce Spence as Gahjii

Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje as Hitu

Tommy Davidson as the Tiny Warrior/Wachootoo Prince

Michael Reid McKay as the Skinny Husband (the Monopoly Guy)

Production
==========

-   *In April 1995, Carrey had DeCerchio replaced with Steve Oedekerk,
    who had worked on the film's predecessor as a script consultant and
    wrote the screenplay for this film, but had no previous experience
    with directing feature films.*

-   *Carrey claims this to be one of his biggest regrets.*

-   *\[citation needed\] Carrey was paid \$10 million for his role.*

Filming began under Tom DeCerchio, who later directed Celtic Pride
(1996).\[better source needed\] Because of the success of the first
film, Morgan Creek Entertainment Group gave lead-actor Jim Carrey the
power to decide the director. In April 1995, Carrey had DeCerchio
replaced with Steve Oedekerk, who had worked on the film's predecessor
as a script consultant and wrote the screenplay for this film, but had
no previous experience with directing feature films. Spike Jonze wanted
to direct the film, but Carrey turned him down as he also had no
experience but he mainly didn't know him well enough. Carrey claims this
to be one of his biggest regrets. However, Carrey stated he doesn't
regret enlisting Oedekerk to direct as they were friends with creative
similarities, which included improvising, changing scenes during
filming, and had a vast understanding of the main character. In June
1995, scenes were shot in South Carolina. The following month, filming
took place near San Antonio, Texas.

Part of the film was also shot in British Columbia, Canada. The film was
shot in Super 35.\[citation needed\] Carrey was paid \$10 million for
his role.

Release
=======

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls was released on November 10, 1995.*

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls was released on November 10, 1995.

Box office
==========

-   *Against its \$30 million budget, Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls was
    a major financial success.*

The film grossed \$37,804,076 during its opening weekend, taking the \#1
spot. In the U.S. and Canada, the film grossed \$108.3 million, and in
other territories, it grossed \$104 million. The worldwide gross was
\$212.3 million. Against its \$30 million budget, Ace Ventura: When
Nature Calls was a major financial success.

Critical reception
==================

-   *The site's critical consensus reads, "Nature Calls in this Ace
    Ventura sequel, and it's answered by the law of diminishing
    returns."*

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 33% based on 24
reviews, with an average rating of 4/10. The site's critical consensus
reads, "Nature Calls in this Ace Ventura sequel, and it's answered by
the law of diminishing returns." On Metacritic, the film received a
weighted average score of 45 out of 100, based on 17 critics, indicating
"mixed or average reviews".

Accolades
=========

-   *Worst Actor – Jim Carrey (Nominated)*

-   *Funniest Actor in a Motion Picture (Leading Role) – Jim Carrey
    (Nominated)*

-   *Best Male Performance – Jim Carrey (Won)*

-   *Best Kiss – Jim Carrey and Sophie Okonedo (Nominated)*

-   *Favorite Movie Actor – Jim Carrey (Won)*

-   *Best Comedic Performance – Jim Carrey (Won)*

1996 ASCAP Award

Top Box Office Films – Robert Folk (Won)

1996 American Comedy Award

Funniest Actor in a Motion Picture (Leading Role) – Jim Carrey
(Nominated)

1996 Kid's Choice Awards

Favorite Movie – (Won)

Favorite Movie Actor – Jim Carrey (Won)

1996 MTV Movie Awards

Best Male Performance – Jim Carrey (Won)

Best Comedic Performance – Jim Carrey (Won)

Best Kiss – Jim Carrey and Sophie Okonedo (Nominated)

1996 Razzie Awards

Worst Remake or Sequel – James G. Robinson (Nominated)

1996 Stinkers Bad Movie Awards

Worst Picture – James G. Robinson (Nominated)

Worst Actor – Jim Carrey (Nominated)

Most Painfully Unfunny Comedy – James G. Robinson (Won)

Worst Sequel – James G. Robinson (Won)

The Sequel Nobody Was Clamoring For – James G. Robinson (Nominated)

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls at the TCM Movie Database*

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls on IMDb*

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls at AllMovie*

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls exclusive clip and still licensing
    at Visual Icon*

-   *Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls at Rotten Tomatoes*

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls on IMDb

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls at AllMovie

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls exclusive clip and still licensing at
Visual Icon

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls at the TCM Movie Database

Ace Ventura: When Nature Calls at Rotten Tomatoes
