**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Akinyele%20Umoja\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Akinyele Umoja
==============

-   *Currently, he is a Professor and Department Chair of the Department
    of African-American Studies at Georgia State University (GSU).*

-   *In April 2013, New York University Press published Umoja's book We
    Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi Freedom
    Movement.*

-   *Akinyele Umoja (born 1954) is an American educator and author who
    specializes in African-American studies.*

Akinyele Umoja (born 1954) is an American educator and author who
specializes in African-American studies. As an activist, he is a
founding member of the New Afrikan People's Organization and the Malcolm
X Grassroots Movement. In April 2013, New York University Press
published Umoja's book We Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the
Mississippi Freedom Movement. Currently, he is a Professor and
Department Chair of the Department of African-American Studies at
Georgia State University (GSU).

Early life and education
========================

-   *Akinyele Omowale Umoja was born in Los Angeles, California, in
    1954, and spent much of his childhood in Compton, California.*

-   *While a Ph.D. candidate at Emory under Robin Kelley, his
    dissertation topic was “Eye for an Eye: Armed Resistance in the
    Mississippi Freedom Movement.”*

-   *Umoja received his BA in Afro-American studies from California
    State University, Los Angeles, in June 1986.*

Akinyele Omowale Umoja was born in Los Angeles, California, in 1954, and
spent much of his childhood in Compton, California. He graduated from
high school in 1972. Umoja received his BA in Afro-American studies from
California State University, Los Angeles, in June 1986. He earned his
M.A. in August 1990 at the Institute of Liberal Arts at Emory University
in Atlanta, Georgia. While a Ph.D. candidate at Emory under Robin
Kelley, his dissertation topic was “Eye for an Eye: Armed Resistance in
the Mississippi Freedom Movement.”

Career
======

Early activism in California
============================

-   *From 1972 until 1982, Umoja was on the staff of Soulbook: The
    Revolutionary Journal of the Black World, founded by Mamadou
    Lumumba.*

-   *He dropped out of UCLA, also joining the African People's Party and
    the House of Umoja.*

-   *Umoja has been active n the liberation struggle of Afrikan people,
    particularly working with the New Afrikan Independence Movement.*

Umoja has been active n the liberation struggle of Afrikan people,
particularly working with the New Afrikan Independence Movement. After
beginning to attend UCLA in 1972, as a freshman, he began to write for
the student newspaper NOMMO and also joined the Muhammad Ahmad (Max
Stanford) Defense Committee (MADC). When activist Ahmad was held on
conspiracy charges, Umoja organized petitions and fundraisers to secure
Ahmad's release. He dropped out of UCLA, also joining the African
People's Party and the House of Umoja. Two years later, he was a
founding member of the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement and the New Afrikan
People's Organization. Umoja has since represented both organizations
nationally and in international forums in the Caribbean, Africa, and
Europe.

From 1972 until 1982, Umoja was on the staff of Soulbook: The
Revolutionary Journal of the Black World, founded by Mamadou Lumumba. He
was also very active in activism in Los Angeles during this time, where
he organized security and assistance for several of Malcolm X’s
associates. He was also active with the Coalition Against Police Abuse
(CAPA) in Los Angeles. In 1979, Umoja was in a committee of the National
Black Human Rights Coalition, which produced a document “detailing the
Black liberation movement’s demand for self-determination, reparations
and a call to release political prisoners.” It was presented to the
Secretary General of the United Nations at that time, who was Salim
Salim of Tanzania.

Career in education
===================

-   *Umoja has varied experiences as an educator.*

-   *He then became a professor at the Department of African American
    Studies at Georgia State University (GSU), and is also department
    chair.*

Umoja has varied experiences as an educator. He has taught in secondary
schools, alternative schools, and colleges and universities, as well as
developed Afrikan-centered curriculum for public schools and
community-education programs. In the late 1980s, he taught social
studies in Atlanta's public schools, where he also taught
African-American history from 1986 until 1991 at the Atlanta
Metropolitan College. In the early 1990s, he began teaching in the
history department of Clark Atlanta University, where he lectured until
1996. He then became a professor at the Department of African American
Studies at Georgia State University (GSU), and is also department chair.

Writing and recent appearances
==============================

-   *Umoja has been a contributor to commercial and popular
    documentaries on black history.*

-   *Umoja was a featured commentator on the American Gangster episode
    “Dr.*

-   *\[citation needed\] In April 2013, New York University Press
    published Umoja's first single-authored book, which was titled We
    Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi Freedom
    Movement.*

Umoja's writing has been featured in scholarly publications as The
Journal of Black Studies, New Political Science, The International
Journal of Africana Studies, Black Scholar, Radical History Review and
Socialism and Democracy. Umoja was one of the contributors to Blackwell
Companion on African American History, The Black Panther Party
Reconsidered, Liberation, Imagination, and the Black Panther Party, and
Malcolm X: A Historical Reader.\[citation needed\] In April 2013, New
York University Press published Umoja's first single-authored book,
which was titled We Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi
Freedom Movement. A review in The Clarion-Ledger in 2015 described the
book as following “confrontations in communities across the state
through the end of the 1970s, demonstrating how black Mississippians
were ultimately able to overcome intimidation by mainstream society,
defeat legal segregation, and claim a measure of political control of
their state.” He was honored for the book in 2014 in Oakland.

Umoja has been a contributor to commercial and popular documentaries on
black history. Umoja was a featured commentator on the American Gangster
episode “Dr. Mutulu Shakur,” which aired on November 8, 2008. He also
appears in Bastards of the Party (2006) and Freedom Archives’ Cointelpro
101 (2010).\[citation needed\] In recent years, he supported movements
in Guyana and Haiti, and, in August 2010, he led a Black August
delegation of the Malcolm X Grassroots Movement to Haiti to investigate
conditions after a recent earthquake. In 2013, he lectured in
Mississippi on the 1965 boycott by black citizens. In 2014, he offered
the solemn libations in honor of his late friend Chokwe Lumumba at the
mayor's funeral in Jackson, Mississippi.

Awards and recognition
======================

-   *In 1995, he was an honorary member of the National Golden Key Honor
    Society.*

-   *He earned the Patricia Harris Fellowship from 1990 until 1993, and,
    in 1994, he was named in Who’s Who in America’s Teachers.*

He earned the Patricia Harris Fellowship from 1990 until 1993, and, in
1994, he was named in Who’s Who in America’s Teachers. In 1995, he was
an honorary member of the National Golden Key Honor Society.

Publications
============

-   *We Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi Freedom
    Movement*

We Will Shoot Back: Armed Resistance in the Mississippi Freedom Movement

Film appearances
================

-   *2008: American Gangster episode “Dr.*

-   *2006: Bastards of the Party Anthony Fuqua and directed by Cle
    “Bone” Sloan*

-   *2010: Cointelpro 101 by Freedom Archives*

2008: American Gangster episode “Dr. Mutulu Shakur”—featured commentator

2006: Bastards of the Party Anthony Fuqua and directed by Cle “Bone”
Sloan

2010: Cointelpro 101 by Freedom Archives

See also
========

-   *List of Georgia State University people*

List of Georgia State University people

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Muhammad Speaks Interviews Dr. Akinyele Umoja, Part 1*

-   *Professor Akinyele K. Umoja gsu.edu*

-   *CNN interview with Dr. Akinyele Umoja*

Akumoja.com (Official website)

Professor Akinyele K. Umoja gsu.edu

Muhammad Speaks Interviews Dr. Akinyele Umoja, Part 1

CNN interview with Dr. Akinyele Umoja
