**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrew%20Goodman\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Andrew Goodman
==============

-   *Andrew Goodman (November 23, 1943 – June 21, 1964) was one of three
    American activists of the Civil Rights Movement and also a social
    worker, murdered near Philadelphia, Mississippi, during Freedom
    Summer in 1964 by members of the Ku Klux Klan.*

Andrew Goodman (November 23, 1943 – June 21, 1964) was one of three
American activists of the Civil Rights Movement and also a social
worker, murdered near Philadelphia, Mississippi, during Freedom Summer
in 1964 by members of the Ku Klux Klan.

Early life and education
========================

-   *Goodman then enrolled at Queens College, New York City, where he
    was a friend and classmate of Paul Simon.*

-   *Goodman's growing interest in anthropology seemed to parallel his
    increasing political seriousness.*

-   *Andrew Goodman was born and raised in the Upper West Side of New
    York City, at 161 West 86 Street.*

Andrew Goodman was born and raised in the Upper West Side of New York
City, at 161 West 86 Street. He was the second of three boys born of
Robert and Carolyn Goodman, and, like fellow murdered activist Michael
Schwerner, was Jewish. His family and community were steeped in
intellectual and socially progressive activism and were devoted to
social justice. An activist at an early age, Goodman graduated from the
progressive Walden School, which was said to have had a strongly
formative influence on his outlook. He attended the Honors Program at
the University of Wisconsin–Madison for a semester but withdrew after
falling ill with pneumonia.

Goodman then enrolled at Queens College, New York City, where he was a
friend and classmate of Paul Simon. With Goodman's brief experience as
an Off-Broadway actor, he originally planned to study drama but switched
to anthropology. Goodman's growing interest in anthropology seemed to
parallel his increasing political seriousness.

Civil rights activism
=====================

-   *Schwerner had been working closely with an assistant James Chaney,
    also a civil rights activist in Meridian.*

-   *The Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission was strongly opposed
    to integration and civil rights.*

-   *In mid-June, Goodman joined Schwerner in Meridian, Mississippi,
    where the latter was designated head of the field office.*

In 1964, Goodman volunteered along with fellow activists Michael
Schwerner, his wife Rita Schwerner Bender, and James Chaney to work on
the "Freedom Summer" project of the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)
to register black people to vote in Mississippi. Having protested U.S.
President Lyndon Johnson's presence at the opening of that year's
World's Fair, Goodman left New York to train and develop civil rights
strategies at Western College for Women (now part of Miami University)
in Oxford, Ohio. In mid-June, Goodman joined Schwerner in Meridian,
Mississippi, where the latter was designated head of the field office.
They worked in rural areas on registering blacks to vote.

The Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission was strongly opposed to
integration and civil rights. It paid spies to identify citizens
suspected of activism, especially people from the North and West who
entered the state. The records opened by court order in 1998 also
revealed the state's deep complicity in the murders of Chaney, Goodman,
and Schwerner, because its investigator A. L. Hopkins passed on to the
Commission information about the workers, including the car license
number of a new civil rights worker. Records showed the Commission, in
turn, passed the information on to the Neshoba County Sheriff, who was
implicated in the murders.

Schwerner had been working closely with an assistant James Chaney, also
a civil rights activist in Meridian. On the morning of June 21, 1964,
the three men set out for Philadelphia, Neshoba County, where they were
to investigate the recent burning of Mount Zion Methodist Church, a
black church that had agreed to be a site for a religious school for
education and voter registration.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="3.559870953630796in" height="5.5in"}\
*Missing persons poster created by the FBI in 1964, shows the
photographs of Andrew Goodman, James Chaney, and Michael Schwerner.*

Arrest, release and murder
==========================

-   *He then turned them over to the Klansmen who beat Chaney and then
    shot and killed Schwerner, Goodman, and Chaney.*

-   *The trio were taken to the jail in Neshoba County where Chaney was
    booked for speeding, while Schwerner and Goodman were booked "for
    investigation".*

On their return to Meridian, the three men were stopped and arrested by
Deputy Sheriff Cecil Price (a Klan member) for allegedly driving 35
miles over the 30-mile-per-hour speed limit. The trio were taken to the
jail in Neshoba County where Chaney was booked for speeding, while
Schwerner and Goodman were booked "for investigation". After Chaney was
fined \$20, the three men were released and told to leave the county.
Price followed them in his patrol car. At 10:25, Price sped to catch up
with the station wagon before it crossed the border into the relative
safety of Lauderdale County. Price ordered the three out of their car
and into his. He then drove them to a deserted area on Rock Cut Road
while being followed by two cars filled with other Klansmen. He then
turned them over to the Klansmen who beat Chaney and then shot and
killed Schwerner, Goodman, and Chaney.

Investigation and trial
=======================

-   *The Neshoba County deputy sheriff and six conspirators were
    convicted by Federal prosecutors of civil rights violations but were
    not convicted of murder.*

-   *The murders changed the course of the Civil Rights Movement:*

-   *Willie Blue, a surviving participant in the Freedom Summer movement
    said: “Goodman's richer than whipped cream.*

The murders changed the course of the Civil Rights Movement:

Rev. Willie Blue, a surviving participant in the Freedom Summer movement
said: “Goodman's richer than whipped cream. He wasn't supposed to die in
Vietnam; he sure wasn’t supposed to die in Mississippi. When America’s
brightest are murdered for doing something fundamentally American,
suddenly the world knows about Mississippi. It was another nail in the
segregated coffin." The FBI entered the case after the men disappeared.
They helped find them buried in an earthen dam. The US government
prosecuted the case under the Enforcement Act of 1870. The Neshoba
County deputy sheriff and six conspirators were convicted by Federal
prosecutors of civil rights violations but were not convicted of murder.
Two defendants were acquitted because the jury deadlocked.

![](media/image2.JPG){width="5.5in" height="4.125in"}\
*A memorial to victims Andrew Goodman, James Earl Chaney, and Michael H.
Schwerner at Mt. Nebo Missionary Baptist Church, Philadelphia,
Mississippi. See murders of Chaney, Goodman, and Schwerner.*

Reinvestigation
===============

-   *Mitchell, who had already earned fame for helping secure
    convictions in several other high-profile civil rights era murder
    cases, including the assassination of Medgar Evers, the Birmingham,
    Alabama 16th Street Baptist Church bombing, and the murder of Vernon
    Dahmer in Mississippi, developed new evidence, found new witnesses
    and pressured the state to take action.*

-   *Bradford and his students' documentary, produced for the National
    History Day contest, presented important new evidence and compelling
    reasons for reopening the Goodman, Chaney, and Schwerner case.*

Journalist Jerry Mitchell, an award-winning investigative reporter for
the Jackson Clarion-Ledger, had written extensively about the case for
many years. Mitchell, who had already earned fame for helping secure
convictions in several other high-profile civil rights era murder cases,
including the assassination of Medgar Evers, the Birmingham, Alabama
16th Street Baptist Church bombing, and the murder of Vernon Dahmer in
Mississippi, developed new evidence, found new witnesses and pressured
the state to take action. Barry Bradford, an Illinois high-school
teacher later famous for helping clear the name of civil rights martyr
Clyde Kennard, and three students, Allison Nichols, Sarah Siegel, and
Brittany Saltiel, joined Mitchell's efforts.

Bradford and his students' documentary, produced for the National
History Day contest, presented important new evidence and compelling
reasons for reopening the Goodman, Chaney, and Schwerner case. They also
obtained an interview with Edgar Ray Killen, which helped persuade the
state to open the case for investigation. Mitchell was able to determine
the identity of "Mr. X", the mystery informer who had helped the FBI
discover the bodies and smash the conspiracy of the Klan in 1964, in
part using evidence developed by Bradford and the students.

On January 7, 2005, Edgar Ray Killen was arrested. He was found guilty
of three counts of manslaughter — not murder — on June 21, 2005, exactly
41 years to the day after the murders. He was sentenced to sixty years
in prison—twenty years for each count, to be served consecutively.

On June 20, 2016, just one day ahead of the 52nd anniversary of the
murders, Attorney General Hood announced an end to the federal and state
investigations into the 'Mississippi Murders', officially closing the
case.

Legacy and honors
=================

-   *In 1966, Andrew's parents, Robert and Carolyn Goodman started The
    Andrew Goodman Foundation to carry on the spirit and purpose of
    their son's life.*

-   *After Carolyn's death in August 2007, David Goodman, Andrew's
    younger brother, and Sylvia Golbin Goodman, David's wife, took up
    the work of the Foundation.*

In 1966, Andrew's parents, Robert and Carolyn Goodman started The Andrew
Goodman Foundation to carry on the spirit and purpose of their son's
life. After the death of Robert Goodman in 1969, Carolyn continued the
work of the Foundation, focusing on projects like a reverse march to
Mississippi and a 25th Anniversary Memorial. The memorial, which took
place at St. John The Divine Church in NYC, was attended by 10,000
people and was presided by Governor Mario Cuomo, Maya Angelou, Peter
Seeger, Aaron Henry, Harry Belafonte, Robert Kennedy Jr., and others
closely associated with the Civil Rights Movement. After Carolyn's death
in August 2007, David Goodman, Andrew's younger brother, and Sylvia
Golbin Goodman, David's wife, took up the work of the Foundation.

For nearly 50 years, the organization was a private foundation acting in
the public interest. With their eyes set on the future, the Board of
Trustees of The Andrew Goodman Foundation elected to turn the
organization into a public charity in 2012. In 2014, on the fiftieth
anniversary of the murders, the Foundation officially launched Vote
Everywhere, a program designed to support college students who are
continuing the work of Freedom Summer.

Goodman
=======

-   *In 2002, a 2,176-foot peak in the Adirondack Mountains town of
    Tupper Lake, New York, was officially named Goodman Mountain in
    Goodman's memory.*

-   *Goodman, along with Chaney and Schwerner, received a posthumous
    Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama in 2014.*

-   *The Trevor Day School now occupies the building and has maintained
    the building's name as the "Andrew Goodman Building".*

In 2002, a 2,176-foot peak in the Adirondack Mountains town of Tupper
Lake, New York, was officially named Goodman Mountain in Goodman's
memory. Goodman's family had spent summers there for 30 years.

The Walden School, in Manhattan, named its middle and upper school
building in Goodman's memory. The Trevor Day School now occupies the
building and has maintained the building's name as the "Andrew Goodman
Building".

Goodman, along with Chaney and Schwerner, received a posthumous
Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama in 2014.

The Chaney-Goodman-Schwerner Clock Tower of Rosenthal Library, is named
in honor of James, Andrew, and Mickey on the CUNY Queens College Campus
in New York City.

Cultural references
===================

See also
========

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *Memoir by Andrew Goodman's mother.*

My Mantelpiece: A Memoir of Survival and Social Justice by Carolyn
Goodman with Brad Herzog, Why Not Books, ISBN 978-0-9849919-4-5. Memoir
by Andrew Goodman's mother.

External links
==============

-   *The Andrew Goodman Foundation*

-   *Andrew Goodman at Find a Grave*

-   *Biography of Andrew Goodman*

-   *The gravestone of Andrew Goodman at the Mount Judah Cemetery,
    Queens, NY*

-   *An interview with Dr. Carolyn Goodman, 89, mother of Andrew Goodman
    (September 2005)*

The movement that helped reopen the case

The Andrew Goodman Foundation

Biography of Andrew Goodman

An interview with Dr. Carolyn Goodman, 89, mother of Andrew Goodman
(September 2005)

The gravestone of Andrew Goodman at the Mount Judah Cemetery, Queens, NY

Andrew Goodman at Find a Grave
