**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anger\_Management\_%28TV\_series%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Anger Management (TV series)
============================

-   *The series is loosely based on the 2003 film of the same name and
    stars Charlie Sheen in a variation of the Jack Nicholson character
    in the film.*

-   *Anger Management is an American television sitcom that premiered on
    FX on June 28, 2012.*

Anger Management is an American television sitcom that premiered on FX
on June 28, 2012. The series is loosely based on the 2003 film of the
same name and stars Charlie Sheen in a variation of the Jack Nicholson
character in the film.

Anger Management broke a ratings record with 5.74 million viewers on its
series debut night, which ranks as the most-watched sitcom premiere in
cable history.

On November 7, 2014, FX announced that the series would end after its
100th episode, which aired on December 22, 2014.

Premise
=======

-   *The incident inspired Charlie to return to school and become an
    anger management therapist.*

-   *Charlie has a complicated relationship with Kate, who is not only
    his therapist, but also his "sex buddy".*

-   *The series revolves around Charlie Goodson (Sheen), a one-time
    minor league baseball player who struggled to take the next step
    because of his recurring anger issues.*

The series revolves around Charlie Goodson (Sheen), a one-time minor
league baseball player who struggled to take the next step because of
his recurring anger issues. Thanks to a therapist, Dr. Kate Wales (Selma
Blair), Charlie was able to get his issues under control and finally
make it to the major leagues. But he had a relapse during a big league
game, breaking a bat over his knee in anger and causing a career-ending
injury.

The incident inspired Charlie to return to school and become an anger
management therapist. Charlie is divorced from his former wife Jennifer
(Shawnee Smith), on whom he cheated multiple times during his
baseball-playing days. The two still see a lot of each other because
they share joint custody of their teenage daughter Sam (Daniela
Bobadilla), who has obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Charlie has a complicated relationship with Kate, who is not only his
therapist, but also his "sex buddy". He holds regular group sessions for
anger-management patients in his home, and also does anger therapy at an
area prison.

Cast and characters
===================

Main
====

-   *Charlie Sheen as Charles "Charlie" Goodson, a former professional
    baseball player turned anger-management therapist.*

-   *Shawnee Smith as Jennifer Goodson, Charlie's ex-wife.*

-   *(episodes 47–100)*

-   *Daniela Bobadilla as Sam Goodson, Charlie and Jennifer's teenage
    daughter.*

-   *Selma Blair as Dr. Kate Wales, Charlie's ex–therapist colleague and
    casual sex partner.*

Charlie Sheen as Charles "Charlie" Goodson, a former professional
baseball player turned anger-management therapist.

Selma Blair as Dr. Kate Wales, Charlie's ex–therapist colleague and
casual sex partner. (episodes 1–52, 57 and 63)

Shawnee Smith as Jennifer Goodson, Charlie's ex-wife.

Daniela Bobadilla as Sam Goodson, Charlie and Jennifer's teenage
daughter. (episodes 1–52, 54, 57 and 63)

Noureen DeWulf as Lacey Patel, Charlie's spoiled, shallow, destructive
anger-management patient.

Michael Arden as Patrick, Charlie's homosexual passive-aggressive
anger-management patient.

Derek Richardson as Nolan Johnson, Charlie's normally unassertive
anger-management patient.

Barry Corbin as Ed, Charlie's elderly redneck anger-management patient.
(episodes 3–100; recurring previously)

Brian Austin Green as Sean Healy, Charlie's nemesis, who has also dated
Jennifer. After Jennifer leaves him over his infidelity, Sean and
Charlie become friends and tomcat around together. (episodes 45–100;
recurring previously)

Laura Bell Bundy as Dr. Jordan Denby, a new psychologist and business
partner for Charlie. Often Charlie's comic foil, Jordan links up
sexually with Sean Healy. (episodes 47–100)

Recurring
=========

-   *He is always freeloading off Charlie while listening to him talk
    about his romantic pursuits.*

-   *Martin Sheen as Martin Goodson, Charlie's hypercritical father.*

-   *He later appears in Charlie's prison therapy group.*

-   *She and Charlie are briefly married after a wild night in Las
    Vegas.*

-   *In "Charlie's Patient Gets Out of Jail", Cleo is released on parole
    and reveals to Charlie that his real name is Derek and that he had a
    wife before going to prison, claiming he's only "prison gay".*

Brett Butler as Brett, the female bartender at the Merry Peasant tavern
that Charlie frequents.

Michael Boatman as Michael, Charlie's neighbor and friend, who is in the
real estate business. He is always freeloading off Charlie while
listening to him talk about his romantic pursuits. He is especially
unlucky at love. (episodes 1–55, guest episode 95)

James Black as Cleo/Derek, a "gay" member of Charlie's prison
anger-therapy group. In "Charlie's Patient Gets Out of Jail", Cleo is
released on parole and reveals to Charlie that his real name is Derek
and that he had a wife before going to prison, claiming he's only
"prison gay".

Darius McCrary as Donovan, a "prison gay" member of Charlie's prison
anger-therapy group; Cleo/Derek's romantic partner. (episodes 1–42)

Stephen Taylor as Wayne, a member of Charlie's prison anger-therapy
group. Despite a seemingly pleasant, philosophical demeanor, he's
revealed to have been a dangerous serial killer.

Aldo Gonzalez as Ernesto Sylvia, a member of Charlie's prison
anger-therapy group.

Martin Sheen as Martin Goodson, Charlie's hypercritical father.
(episodes 10–100)

Steve Valentine as Dr. Moore, a rival psychiatrist whom Charlie
considers his archenemy. (episodes 13–44)

Anna Hutchison as Sasha, a hooker who is occasionally a real girlfriend
for Charlie. She and Charlie are briefly married after a wild night in
Las Vegas. (episodes 49–92)

Ajay Mehta as Sanjay Patel, Lacey's father.

Meera Simhan as Mira Patel, Lacey's mother.

Schuyler Helford as Sateen, Lacey's sister, who is frequently competing
with her.

Michael Gross as Dr. Randy Warren, a "psychic psychologist" whom Charlie
exposes as a fraud. He later appears in Charlie's prison therapy group.
(episodes 77–80)

Elaine Hendrix as Warden Hartley, the new warden at the prison where
Charlie and Jordan work. (episodes 79–83)

Production
==========

-   *Landgraf also announced that Martin Sheen, who guest-starred in
    season one as Charlie's on-screen father, would become a season two
    regular cast member.*

-   *On August 29, 2012 it was announced that the show would be picked
    up for a further 90 episodes.*

-   *To boost its sagging season two ratings, FX announced that four
    episodes (two of them first-run) would air on FX's parent network
    Fox on Monday nights in June, starting June 3, 2013.*

On July 18, 2011, it was announced that a show based on the 2003 film of
the same name was in development with Charlie Sheen starring in the role
originally played by Jack Nicholson from the film. The series was
Sheen's first acting role since he was officially fired from the hit CBS
sitcom Two and a Half Men.

On October 27, 2011, it was announced that FX had picked up the series
with an initial ten-episode order which, if successful, FX would then
order an additional 90 episodes under a syndication model crafted by
Debmar-Mercury. On August 29, 2012 it was announced that the show would
be picked up for a further 90 episodes. On January 9, 2013, FX president
John Landgraf said that there will essentially be "45 new episodes per
year". Landgraf also announced that Martin Sheen, who guest-starred in
season one as Charlie's on-screen father, would become a season two
regular cast member. While Martin did appear more frequently on the
show, it was only in selected episodes and he was ultimately not
promoted to regular cast member.

FX paid a \$600,000-per-episode license fee for the series. To boost its
sagging season two ratings, FX announced that four episodes (two of them
first-run) would air on FX's parent network Fox on Monday nights in
June, starting June 3, 2013.

Casting
=======

-   *Smith was cast as Charlie's ex-wife and Blair was cast as Charlie's
    therapist and possible love interest.*

-   *Sheen's father, Martin Sheen, who made a guest appearance in season
    one as Charlie's on-screen father, had an expanded role in the
    second season.*

-   *Michael Arden and Daniela Bobadilla were cast as, respectively,
    Patrick (an openly gay member of Charlie's therapy group) and Sam
    (Charlie's teenaged daughter who has obsessive-compulsive
    disorder).*

Casting announcements began in January 2012, with Shawnee Smith and
Selma Blair first cast as the two female leads. Smith was cast as
Charlie's ex-wife and Blair was cast as Charlie's therapist and possible
love interest.

Several actresses tested for the two female lead roles, including Julie
Benz, Jenica Bergere, Elaine Hendrix (who would get a role on the show),
Kate Reinders and Nichole Hiltz.

Next to be cast was Noureen DeWulf, in the role of Lacey, a spoiled rich
girl who is sentenced to join the therapy group after shooting her
boyfriend in the testicles when he cheated on her. Michael Arden and
Daniela Bobadilla were cast as, respectively, Patrick (an openly gay
member of Charlie's therapy group) and Sam (Charlie's teenaged daughter
who has obsessive-compulsive disorder). Barry Corbin was cast as Ed, a
cranky, bigoted Vietnam veteran and the member of the therapy group who
is angry at everyone. Originally billed as a recurring character, the
producers decided after just two episodes to make Ed a series regular.
Derek Richardson was the last actor cast in the series, in the role of
Nolan, a frequently stoned member of the therapy group whose anger issue
is that he has no anger.

Brian Austin Green, who initially made a guest appearance, was promoted
to a starring role following the dismissal of Selma Blair. Denise
Richards, Lindsay Lohan, Cee Lo Green, and Kerri Kenney-Silver made
guest appearances. Guitarist Slash made a cameo appearance. Sheen's
father, Martin Sheen, who made a guest appearance in season one as
Charlie's on-screen father, had an expanded role in the second season.
FX president John Landgraf said, "I thought it would be a better series
if it was also a multi-generational series".

Selma Blair's dismissal
=======================

-   *On August 5, 2013, FX announced that Laura Bell Bundy would be
    replacing Blair as Charlie's new colleague, Dr. Jordan Denby, with
    production on the first episode featuring Bundy's character
    beginning that same day.*

-   *On June 17, 2013, TMZ reported that Sheen had told producers that
    he would refuse to work should Blair turn up to work that day as a
    result of her being the most vocal among the cast and crew regarding
    complaints about his being a "menace" to work with – specifically
    questioning his punctuality and work ethic.*

On June 17, 2013, TMZ reported that Sheen had told producers that he
would refuse to work should Blair turn up to work that day as a result
of her being the most vocal among the cast and crew regarding complaints
about his being a "menace" to work with – specifically questioning his
punctuality and work ethic. The following day, TMZ reported that Sheen
had told the producers that, if they refused to fire Blair, then he
would quit. Later that day, Lionsgate issued a statement confirming that
Blair would not be returning to the show and that a new female lead role
would be created to fill the void.

The new female lead role was described as a "by-the-book psychiatrist"
who joins Charlie to co-author the sex study research he and Kate had
been working on before she left and moved to India. On August 5, 2013,
FX announced that Laura Bell Bundy would be replacing Blair as Charlie's
new colleague, Dr. Jordan Denby, with production on the first episode
featuring Bundy's character beginning that same day. It was announced
that Brian Austin Green would have an expanded role following Blair's
firing.

Potential lawsuit
=================

-   *It was also reported that a decision had already been made prior to
    her dismissal to write her off the show as "America didn't want to
    see Charlie with just one girlfriend" – however, the plan was to
    phase the character out over eight episodes and that, once Sheen
    heard of Blair's comments, "that process was accelerated" and the
    character abruptly moved to India.*

On September 13, 2013, TMZ reported that Blair was threatening both
Sheen and Lionsgate Entertainment for the \$1.2 million she would have
earned had she not been dismissed from the show but also noted that both
sides were talking and attempting to reach a settlement. It was also
reported that a decision had already been made prior to her dismissal to
write her off the show as "America didn't want to see Charlie with just
one girlfriend" – however, the plan was to phase the character out over
eight episodes and that, once Sheen heard of Blair's comments, "that
process was accelerated" and the character abruptly moved to India.

Canceled episode
================

-   *In June 2013, a press release for an episode titled "Charlie and
    Kate Have Sex for Science" stated that the episode was set to air on
    June 27, 2013, as the twenty-sixth episode of the season.*

-   *An episode with a similar title, but with different storylines,
    named "Charlie Does It for Science" aired on December 5, 2013.*

In June 2013, a press release for an episode titled "Charlie and Kate
Have Sex for Science" stated that the episode was set to air on June 27,
2013, as the twenty-sixth episode of the season. Following the aftermath
of Blair's dismissal, the planned broadcast was canceled and replaced
with "Charlie and the Hot Nerd" – the first episode produced without
Blair. The status of "Charlie and Kate Have Sex for Science" is unknown
as all episodes with production codes up to, and including, 1040
(Blair's final episode) have aired. An episode with a similar title, but
with different storylines, named "Charlie Does It for Science" aired on
December 5, 2013.

Broadcast
=========

-   *In Canada the series premiered on CTV on August 12, 2012.*

-   *The original broadcast was within the United States of America on
    the cable channel FX from June 28, 2012, and was later broadcast in
    the summer of 2013 by Fox.*

-   *Anger Management began airing in Australia on the Nine Network on
    August 14, 2012, and in New Zealand on TVNZ's TV2 from August
    15, 2012.*

The original broadcast was within the United States of America on the
cable channel FX from June 28, 2012, and was later broadcast in the
summer of 2013 by Fox. In Canada the series premiered on CTV on August
12, 2012. New episodes later aired on M3. In the United Kingdom/Ireland
it premiered on Comedy Central on September 12, 2012. Anger Management
began airing in Australia on the Nine Network on August 14, 2012, and in
New Zealand on TVNZ's TV2 from August 15, 2012. The series was in
traditional broadcast syndication in the United States from September
2014 until September 2018, distributed by Debmar-Mercury and Twentieth
Television.

Critical reception
==================

-   *Anger Management received largely negative reviews.*

-   *Anger Management was renewed for 90 more episodes, and production
    started on September 24, 2012.*

-   *Alan Sepinwall of HitFix stated: "Anger Management is Charlie Sheen
    doing what Charlie Sheen does—on-screen.*

Anger Management received largely negative reviews. Based on 33 reviews
collected by Rotten Tomatoes, the first season of Anger Management
received an average 21% overall "Rotten" approval rating; the website's
consensus states, "Anger Management is aggressively so-so, with thin
characters and a few groan-worthy gags for every good one."

Metacritic gave the first season of the show a score of 44 out of 100
based on 33 critics' reviews. Linda Stasi of the New York Post called
the series "not so bad", adding "Anger Management is pretty conventional
up to and including an idiot laugh track—and a character named
Charlie—again. But maybe the familiar is what will keep crazy Charlie
\[Sheen\] from killing himself and others in a blind, drunken, psycho
haze on set. Or maybe not." The Wall Street Journal's Nancy DeWolf Smith
thought the series was "usually funny, often clever" and added "The
accomplishment here is that tight writing and editing, a solid cast with
good timing and Mr. Sheen's chops as the ne plus ultra of sitcom
performers, make the whole thing feel, if not entirely fresh—then
crisp."

Alan Sepinwall of HitFix stated: "Anger Management is Charlie Sheen
doing what Charlie Sheen does—on-screen. It's not artful, it's not
elegant ... It will likely give his fans what they want. And if there
are enough of them to trigger the order for the extra 90 episodes, then
FX, Helford and everyone else will feel justified in taking another
chance on the guy, despite what happened in the past."

The Huffington Post's Maureen Ryan stated: "despite the careful
attention to image enhancement possibilities, the core ugliness and
toxic narcissism of 'Anger Management' are impossible to ignore. ...
Whoever 'Anger Management' benefits – and it certainly won't be viewers
used to FX's usual scripted fare – whole enterprise is really just image
management. Nice work if you can get it." Anger Management was renewed
for 90 more episodes, and production started on September 24, 2012.

Home media
==========

Notes
=====

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Anger Management on IMDb*

Official website

Anger Management on IMDb
