**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ares%20I\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Ares I
======

-   *NASA planned to use Ares I to launch Orion, the spacecraft intended
    for NASA human spaceflight missions after the Space Shuttle was
    retired in 2011.*

-   *Ares I was to complement the larger, unmanned Ares V, which was the
    cargo launch vehicle for Constellation.*

-   *Ares I was the crew launch vehicle that was being developed by NASA
    as part of the Constellation program.*

Ares I was the crew launch vehicle that was being developed by NASA as
part of the Constellation program. The name "Ares" refers to the Greek
deity Ares, who is identified with the Roman god Mars. Ares I was
originally known as the "Crew Launch Vehicle" (CLV).

NASA planned to use Ares I to launch Orion, the spacecraft intended for
NASA human spaceflight missions after the Space Shuttle was retired in
2011. Ares I was to complement the larger, unmanned Ares V, which was
the cargo launch vehicle for Constellation. NASA selected the Ares
designs for their anticipated overall safety, reliability and
cost-effectiveness. However, the Constellation program, including Ares I
was cancelled by U.S. president Barack Obama in October 2010 with the
passage of his 2010 NASA authorization bill. In September 2011, NASA
detailed the Space Launch System as its new vehicle for human
exploration beyond Earth's orbit.

Development
===========

Advanced Transportation System Studies
======================================

-   *The variants that were considered included both the J-2S engines
    and Space Shuttle Main Engines (SSMEs) for the second stage.*

-   *A section of the ATSS report describes several possible vehicles
    much like the Ares I design, with liquid rocket second stages
    stacked above segmented solid rocket booster (SRB) first stages.*

In 1995 Lockheed Martin produced an Advanced Transportation System
Studies (ATSS) report for the Marshall Space Flight Center. A section of
the ATSS report describes several possible vehicles much like the Ares I
design, with liquid rocket second stages stacked above segmented solid
rocket booster (SRB) first stages. The variants that were considered
included both the J-2S engines and Space Shuttle Main Engines (SSMEs)
for the second stage. The variants also assumed use of the Advanced
Solid Rocket Motor (ASRM) as a first stage, but the ASRM was cancelled
in 1993 due to significant cost overruns.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.254166666666667in"}\
*Concept image of the evolution of the Ares I design from pre-ESAS to
latest developments.*

Exploration Systems Architecture Study
======================================

-   *A Shuttle-derived launch architecture was selected by NASA for the
    Ares I.*

-   *The estimate counted each Shuttle launch as two safe launches of
    the Ares booster.*

-   *The ESAS launch safety estimates for the Ares were based on the
    Space Shuttle, despite the differences, and included only launches
    after the post-Challenger Space Shuttle redesign.*

President George W. Bush had announced the Vision for Space Exploration
in January 2004, and NASA under Sean O'Keefe had solicited plans for a
Crew Exploration Vehicle from multiple bidders, with the plan for having
two competing teams. These plans were discarded by incoming
administrator Michael Griffin, and on April 29, 2005, NASA chartered the
Exploration Systems Architecture Study to accomplish specific goals:

determine the "top-level requirements and configurations for crew and
cargo launch systems to support the lunar and Mars exploration programs"

assess the "CEV requirements and plans to enable the CEV to provide crew
transport to the ISS"

"develop a reference lunar exploration architecture concept to support
sustained human and robotic lunar exploration operations"

"identify key technologies required to enable and significantly enhance
these reference exploration systems"

A Shuttle-derived launch architecture was selected by NASA for the Ares
I. Originally, the crewed vehicle would have used a four-segment solid
rocket booster (SRB) for the first stage, and a simplified Space Shuttle
Main Engine (SSME) for the second stage. An unmanned version was to use
a five-segment booster with the same second stage. Shortly after the
initial design was approved, additional tests revealed that the Orion
spacecraft would be too heavy for the four-segment booster to lift, and
in January 2006 NASA announced they would slightly reduce the size of
the Orion spacecraft, add a fifth segment to the solid-rocket first
stage, and replace the single SSME with the Apollo-derived J-2X motor.
While the change from a four-segment first stage to a five-segment
version would allow NASA to construct virtually identical motors, the
main reason for the change to the five-segment booster was the move to
the J-2X.

The Exploration Systems Architecture Study concluded that the cost and
safety of the Ares was superior to that of either of the Evolved
Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELVs). The cost estimates in the study were
based on the assumption that new launch pads would be needed for
human-rated EELVs. The facilities for the current EELVs (LC-37 for Delta
IV, LC-41 for Atlas V) are in place and could be modified, but this may
not have been the most cost effective solution as LC-37 is a contractor
owned and operated (COGO) facility and modifications for the Delta IV H
were determined to be similar to those required for Ares I. The ESAS
launch safety estimates for the Ares were based on the Space Shuttle,
despite the differences, and included only launches after the
post-Challenger Space Shuttle redesign. The estimate counted each
Shuttle launch as two safe launches of the Ares booster. The safety of
the Atlas V and Delta IV was estimated from the failure rates of all
Delta II, Atlas-Centaur, and Titan launches since 1992, although they
are not similar designs.\[citation needed\]

In May 2009 the previously withheld appendices to the 2006 ESAS study
were leaked, revealing a number of apparent flaws in the study, which
gave safety exemptions to the selected Ares I design while using a model
which penalized the EELV-based designs.\[unreliable source?\]

![](media/image2.jpg){width="4.737332677165354in" height="5.5in"}\
*An early concept image of the Ares I (right) and Ares V (left) rockets*

Role in Constellation program
=============================

-   *Unlike the Space Shuttle, where both crew and cargo were launched
    simultaneously on the same rocket, the plans for Project
    Constellation outlined having two separate launch vehicles, the Ares
    I and the Ares V, for crew and cargo, respectively.*

-   *Ares I was the crew launch component of the Constellation program.*

Ares I was the crew launch component of the Constellation program.
Originally named the "Crew Launch Vehicle" or CLV, the Ares name was
chosen from the Greek deity Ares. Unlike the Space Shuttle, where both
crew and cargo were launched simultaneously on the same rocket, the
plans for Project Constellation outlined having two separate launch
vehicles, the Ares I and the Ares V, for crew and cargo, respectively.
Having two separate launch vehicles allows for more specialized designs
for the crew and heavy cargo launch rockets.

The Ares I rocket was specifically being designed to launch the Orion
Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle. Orion was intended as a crew capsule,
similar in design to the Apollo program capsule, to transport astronauts
to the International Space Station, the Moon, and eventually Mars. Ares
I might have also delivered some (limited) resources to orbit, including
supplies for the International Space Station or subsequent delivery to
the planned lunar base.

Contractor selection
====================

-   *The upper stage of Ares I was to have been built at the same rocket
    factory used for the Space Shuttle's External Tank and the Saturn
    V's S-IC first stage.*

-   *NASA selected Alliant Techsystems, the builder of the Space Shuttle
    Solid Rocket Boosters, as the prime contractor for the Ares I first
    stage.*

-   *On August 28, 2007 NASA awarded the Ares I Upper Stage
    manufacturing contract to Boeing.*

NASA selected Alliant Techsystems, the builder of the Space Shuttle
Solid Rocket Boosters, as the prime contractor for the Ares I first
stage. NASA announced that Rocketdyne would be the main subcontractor
for the J-2X rocket engine on July 16, 2007. NASA selected Boeing to
provide and install the avionics for the Ares I rocket on December 12,
2007.

On August 28, 2007 NASA awarded the Ares I Upper Stage manufacturing
contract to Boeing. Boeing built the S-IC stage of the Saturn V rocket
at Michoud Aerospace Factory in the 1960s. The upper stage of Ares I was
to have been built at the same rocket factory used for the Space
Shuttle's External Tank and the Saturn V's S-IC first stage.

J-2X engines
============

-   *Unlike the Space Shuttle Main Engine, which was designed to start
    on the ground, the J-2X was designed from inception to be started in
    both mid-air and in near-vacuum.*

-   *The Space Shuttle Main Engine, on the other hand, would have
    required extensive modifications to add an air-start capability*

-   *At approximately US\$20–25 million per engine, the
    Rocketdyne-designed and produced J-2X would have cost less than half
    as much as the more complex Space Shuttle Main Engine (around \$55
    million).*

At approximately US\$20–25 million per engine, the Rocketdyne-designed
and produced J-2X would have cost less than half as much as the more
complex Space Shuttle Main Engine (around \$55 million). Unlike the
Space Shuttle Main Engine, which was designed to start on the ground,
the J-2X was designed from inception to be started in both mid-air and
in near-vacuum. This air-start capability was critical, especially in
the original J-2 engine used on the Saturn V's S-IVB stage, to propel
the Apollo spacecraft to the Moon. The Space Shuttle Main Engine, on the
other hand, would have required extensive modifications to add an
air-start capability

![](media/image3.jpg){width="5.5in" height="5.5in"}\
*A concept image of an Ares I launching from Kennedy Space Center
launchpad 39B.*

System requirements review
==========================

-   *On January 4, 2007, NASA announced that the Ares I had completed
    its system requirements review, the first such review completed for
    any manned spacecraft design since the Space Shuttle.*

-   *This review was the first major milestone in the design process,
    and was intended to ensure that the Ares I launch system met all the
    requirements necessary for the Constellation Program.*

On January 4, 2007, NASA announced that the Ares I had completed its
system requirements review, the first such review completed for any
manned spacecraft design since the Space Shuttle. This review was the
first major milestone in the design process, and was intended to ensure
that the Ares I launch system met all the requirements necessary for the
Constellation Program. In addition to the release of the review, NASA
also announced that a redesign in the tank hardware was made. Instead of
separate LH2 and LO2 tanks, separated by an "intertank" like that of the
Space Shuttle External Tank, the new LH2 and LOX tanks would have been
separated by a common bulkhead like that employed on the Saturn V S-II
and S-IVB stages. This would have provided a significant mass saving and
eliminated the need to design a second stage interstage unit that would
have had to carry the weight of the Orion spacecraft with it.

![](media/image4.jpg){width="3.659332895888014in" height="5.5in"}\
*Ares I-X launches from Kennedy Space Center launch pad 39B on October
28, 2009.*

Analysis and testing
====================

-   *In January 2008, NASA Watch revealed that the first stage solid
    rocket of the Ares I could have created high vibrations during the
    first few minutes of ascent.*

-   *Launch Pad 39B was damaged more than with a Space Shuttle launch.*

-   *The Ares I prototype, Ares I-X, successfully completed a test
    launch on October 28, 2009.*

In January 2008, NASA Watch revealed that the first stage solid rocket
of the Ares I could have created high vibrations during the first few
minutes of ascent. The vibrations would have been caused by thrust
oscillations inside the first stage. NASA officials had identified the
potential problem at the Ares I system design review in late October
2007, stating in a press release that it wanted to solve it by March
2008. NASA admitted that this problem was very severe, rating it four
out of five on a risk scale, but the agency was very confident in
solving it. The mitigation approach developed by the Ares engineering
team included active and passive vibration damping, adding an active
tuned-mass absorber and a passive "compliance structure" – essentially a
spring-loaded ring that would have detuned the Ares I stack. NASA also
pointed out that, since this would have been a new launch system, like
the Apollo or Space Shuttle systems, it was normal for such problems to
arise during the development stage. According to NASA, analysis of the
data and telemetry from the Ares I-X flight showed that vibrations from
thrust oscillation were within the normal range for a Space Shuttle
flight.

A study released in July 2009 by the 45th Space Wing of the US Air Force
concluded that an abort 30–60 seconds after launch would have a \~100%
chance of killing all crew, due to the capsule being engulfed until
ground impact by a cloud of 4,000 °F (2,200 °C) solid propellant
fragments, which would melt the capsule's nylon parachute material.
NASA's study showed the crew capsule would have flown beyond the more
severe danger.

The Ares I igniter was an advanced version of the flight-proven igniter
used on the Space Shuttle's solid rocket boosters. It was approximately
18 inches (46 cm) in diameter and 36 inches (91 cm) long, and took
advantage of upgraded insulation materials that had improved thermal
properties to protect the igniter's case from the burning solid
propellant. NASA successfully completed test firing of the igniter for
the Ares I engines on March 10, 2009 at ATK Launch Systems test
facilities near Promontory, Utah. The igniter test generated a flame 200
feet (60 meters) in length, and preliminary data showed the igniter
performed as planned.

Development of the Ares I propulsion elements continued to make strong
progress. On September 10, 2009, the first Ares I development motor
(DM-1) was successfully tested in a full-scale, full-duration test
firing. This test was followed by two more development motor tests, DM-2
on August 31, 2010 and DM-3 on September 8, 2011. For DM-2 the motor was
cooled to a core temperature of 40 degrees Fahrenheit (4 degrees
Celsius), and for DM-3 it was heated to above 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32
degrees Celsius). In addition to other objectives, these two tests
validated Ares motor performance at extreme temperatures. NASA conducted
a successful 500-second test firing of the J-2X rocket engine at John C.
Stennis Space Center in November 2011.

The Ares I prototype, Ares I-X, successfully completed a test launch on
October 28, 2009. Launch Pad 39B was damaged more than with a Space
Shuttle launch. During descent, one of the three parachutes of the Ares
I-X’s first stage failed to open, and another opened only partially,
causing the booster to splash down harder and suffer structural damage.
The launch accomplished all primary test objectives.

![](media/image5.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6830358705161856in"}\
*Ares I Mobile Launcher Platform and crawler-transporter at east park
site*

Schedule and cost
=================

-   *NASA completed the Ares I system requirements review in
    January 2007.*

-   *Delays in the Ares I development schedule due to budgetary
    pressures and unforeseen engineering and technical difficulties
    would have increased the gap between the end of the Space Shuttle
    program and the first operational flight of Ares I.*

NASA completed the Ares I system requirements review in January 2007.
Project design was to have continued through the end of 2009, with
development and qualification testing running concurrently through 2012.
As of July 2009\[update\], flight articles were to have begun production
towards the end of 2009 for a first launch in June 2011. Since 2006 the
first launch of a human was planned for no later than 2014, which is
four years after the planned retirement of the Space Shuttle.

Delays in the Ares I development schedule due to budgetary pressures and
unforeseen engineering and technical difficulties would have increased
the gap between the end of the Space Shuttle program and the first
operational flight of Ares I. Because the Constellation program was
never allocated the funding originally projected, the total estimated
cost to develop the Ares I through 2015 rose from \$28 billion in 2006
to more than \$40 billion in 2009. The Ares I-X project cost was \$445
million.

Originally scheduled for first test flights in 2011, the independent
analysis by the Augustine Commission found in late 2009 that due to
technical and financial problems Ares I was not likely to have had its
first crewed launch until 2017–2019 under the current budget, or late
2016 with an unconstrained budget. The Augustine Commission also stated
that Ares I and Orion would have an estimated recurring cost of almost
\$1 billion per flight. However, later financial analysis in March 2010
showed that the Ares I would have cost \$1 billion or more to operate
per flight had the Ares I flown just once a year. If the Ares I system
were flown multiple times a year the marginal costs could have fallen to
as low as \$138 million per launch. In March 2010, NASA administrator
Charlie Bolden testified to congress that the Ares I would cost \$4–4.5
billion a year, and \$1.6 billion per flight. The Ares I marginal cost
was predicted to have been a fraction of the Shuttle's marginal costs
even had it flown multiple times per year. By comparison, the cost of
launching three astronauts on a manned Russian Soyuz is \$153 million.
Representative Robert Aderholt stated on March 2010 that he had received
a letter from NASA which claimed that it would have cost \$1.1 billion
dollars to fly the Ares I rocket three times a year.

On February 8, 2011 it was reported that Alliant Techsystems and Astrium
proposed to use Ares I's first stage with the second stage from the
Ariane 5 to form a new rocket named Liberty.

Cancellation
============

-   *In October 2010, the NASA authorization bill for 2010 was signed
    into law which canceled Constellation.*

-   *On February 1, 2010, President Barack Obama announced a proposal to
    cancel the Constellation program effective with the U.S. 2011 fiscal
    year budget, but later announced changes to the proposal in a major
    space policy speech at Kennedy Space Center on April 15, 2010.*

On February 1, 2010, President Barack Obama announced a proposal to
cancel the Constellation program effective with the U.S. 2011 fiscal
year budget, but later announced changes to the proposal in a major
space policy speech at Kennedy Space Center on April 15, 2010. In
October 2010, the NASA authorization bill for 2010 was signed into law
which canceled Constellation. But previous legislation kept
Constellation contracts in force until passage of a new funding bill for
2011.

![](media/image6.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.125in"}\
*Comparison of the basic size and shape of the Saturn V, Space Shuttle,
Ares I, and Ares V.*

![](media/image7.png){width="4.480667104111986in" height="5.5in"}\
*Exploded view of the Ares I*

Design
======

-   *Ares I had a payload capability in the 25-metric-ton (28-short-ton;
    25-long-ton) class and was comparable to vehicles such as the Delta
    IV and the Atlas V. The NASA study group that selected what would
    become the Ares I rated the vehicle as almost twice as safe as an
    Atlas or Delta IV-derived design.*

Ares I had a payload capability in the 25-metric-ton (28-short-ton;
25-long-ton) class and was comparable to vehicles such as the Delta IV
and the Atlas V. The NASA study group that selected what would become
the Ares I rated the vehicle as almost twice as safe as an Atlas or
Delta IV-derived design. The rocket was to have made use of an
aluminum-lithium alloy which is lower in density but similar in strength
compared to other aluminum alloys. The alloy is produced by Alcoa.

First stage
===========

-   *Other changes made to the Solid Rocket Booster were to have been
    the removal of the Space Shuttle External Tank (ET) attachment
    points and the replacement of the Solid Rocket Booster nosecone with
    a new forward adapter that would have interfaced with the
    liquid-fueled second stage.*

-   *The first stage was to have been a more powerful and reusable solid
    fuel rocket derived from the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster
    (SRB).*

-   *This fifth segment would have enabled the Ares I to produce more
    thrust.*

The first stage was to have been a more powerful and reusable solid fuel
rocket derived from the Space Shuttle Solid Rocket Booster (SRB).
Compared with the Solid Rocket Booster, which had four segments, the
most notable difference was the addition of a fifth segment. This fifth
segment would have enabled the Ares I to produce more thrust. Other
changes made to the Solid Rocket Booster were to have been the removal
of the Space Shuttle External Tank (ET) attachment points and the
replacement of the Solid Rocket Booster nosecone with a new forward
adapter that would have interfaced with the liquid-fueled second stage.
The adapter was to have been equipped with solid-fueled separation
motors to facilitate the disconnection of the stages during ascent. The
grain design was also changed, and so were the insulation and liner. By
the Ares I first stage ground test, the case, grain design, number of
segments, insulation, liner, throat diameter, thermal protection systems
and nozzle had all changed.

Upper stage
===========

-   *The only new hardware on the original ET-derived second stage would
    have been the thrust assembly for the J-2X engine, new
    fill/drain/vent disconnects for the fuel and oxidizer, and mounting
    interfaces for the solid-fueled first stage and the Orion
    spacecraft.*

-   *The spray-on foam insulation was the only part of the Shuttle's ET
    that would have been used on this new Saturn-derived upper stage.*

The upper stage, derived from the Shuttle's External Tank (ET) and based
on the S-IVB stage of the Saturn V, was to be propelled by a single J-2X
rocket engine fueled by liquid hydrogen (LH2) and liquid oxygen (LOX).
The J-2X was derived from the original J-2 engine used during the Apollo
program, but with more thrust (\~294,000 lbf) and fewer parts than the
original engine. On July 16, 2007, NASA awarded Rocketdyne a sole-source
contract for the J-2X engines to be used for ground and flight tests.
Rocketdyne was the prime contractor for the original J-2 engines used in
the Apollo program.

Although its J-2X engine was derived from an established design, the
upper stage itself would have been wholly new. Originally to have been
based on both the internal and external structure of the ET, the
original design called for separate fuel and oxidizer tanks, joined
together by an "intertank" structure, and covered with the spray-on foam
insulation to keep venting to a minimum. The only new hardware on the
original ET-derived second stage would have been the thrust assembly for
the J-2X engine, new fill/drain/vent disconnects for the fuel and
oxidizer, and mounting interfaces for the solid-fueled first stage and
the Orion spacecraft.

Using a concept going back to the Apollo program, the "intertank"
structure was dropped to decrease mass, and in its place, a common
bulkhead, similar to that used on both the S-II and S-IVB stages of the
Saturn V, would have been used between the tanks. The savings from these
changes were used to increase propellant capacity, which was 297,900
pounds (135,100 kg). The spray-on foam insulation was the only part of
the Shuttle's ET that would have been used on this new Saturn-derived
upper stage.

See also
========

-   *Ares IV, a proposed heavy-lift variant of Ares I and V combined.*

-   *DIRECT, shuttle-derived launcher proposed as alternative to Ares I
    and Ares V.*

-   *Liberty (rocket), a proposed medium-lift rocket like the Ares I, a
    SDLV using an SRB-derivative first stage*

Ares IV, a proposed heavy-lift variant of Ares I and V combined.

DIRECT, shuttle-derived launcher proposed as alternative to Ares I and
Ares V.

Liberty (rocket), a proposed medium-lift rocket like the Ares I, a SDLV
using an SRB-derivative first stage

Omega, ATK's proposed new rocket based on SDLV SRB-derived first and
second stages and Aerojet Rocketdyne RL10 third stage

List of Constellation missions

Boilerplate (spaceflight)

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *NASA Ares I page*

-   *GAO-08-51, Ares I Report to Congress, GAO*

NASA Ares I page

GAO-08-51, Ares I Report to Congress, GAO
