**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Augustus\_C.\_Hand\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="4.2111362642169725in" height="5.5in"}\
*Augustus C. Hand, Congressman and Judge.*

Augustus C. Hand
================

-   *Augustus Cincinnatus Hand (September 4, 1803 Shoreham, Addison
    County, Vermont – March 8, 1878 Elizabethtown, New York, Essex
    County, New York) was an American lawyer and politician from New
    York.*

Augustus Cincinnatus Hand (September 4, 1803 Shoreham, Addison County,
Vermont – March 8, 1878 Elizabethtown, New York, Essex County, New York)
was an American lawyer and politician from New York.

Life
====

-   *He was admitted to the bar in 1828, and commenced practice at Crown
    Point, New York.*

-   *He was a member of the New York State Senate from 1845 to 1847,
    sitting in the 68th, 69th and 70th New York State Legislatures.*

-   *He was a justice of the New York Supreme Court (4th District) from
    1847 to 1855, and ex officio a judge of the New York Court of
    Appeals in 1855.*

He studied law in at Litchfield Law School. He was admitted to the bar
in 1828, and commenced practice at Crown Point, New York. He removed to
Elizabethtown in 1831, and was Surrogate of Essex County from 1831 to
1839.

Hand was elected as a Democrat to the 26th United States Congress, and
served from March 4, 1839, to March 3, 1841.

He was a member of the New York State Senate from 1845 to 1847, sitting
in the 68th, 69th and 70th New York State Legislatures.

He was a justice of the New York Supreme Court (4th District) from 1847
to 1855, and ex officio a judge of the New York Court of Appeals in
1855. Afterwards he resumed the practice of law.

He was a delegate to the 1868 Democratic National Convention. He resumed
the practice of his profession.

He was buried in the family cemetery in Elizabethtown, NY.

State Senator Matthew Hale (1829–1897) was married to his daughter Ellen
S. Hand (c.1835–1867).

References
==========

-   *Biographical Directory of the United States
    Congress..mw-parser-output
    cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
    q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
    a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
    span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
    dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output
    code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}*

United States Congress. "Augustus C. Hand (id: H000152)". Biographical
Directory of the United States Congress..mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

The New York Civil List compiled by Franklin Benjamin Hough (pages 135f,
141, 351 and 413; Weed, Parsons and Co., 1858)

Court of Appeals judges

External links
==============

-   *Augustus Cincinnatus Hand entry at The Political Graveyard*

-   *Augustus C. Hand at Find a Grave*

Augustus Cincinnatus Hand entry at The Political Graveyard

Augustus C. Hand at Find a Grave
