**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australian%20Space%20Agency\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Australian Space Agency
=======================

-   *The Australian Space Agency is the public service agency of
    Australia responsible for the development of Australia’s space
    industry, coordinating domestic activities, identifying
    opportunities and facilitating international space engagement.*

The Australian Space Agency is the public service agency of Australia
responsible for the development of Australia’s space industry,
coordinating domestic activities, identifying opportunities and
facilitating international space engagement.

Responsibilities
================

-   *Administering space activities legislation and delivering on our
    international obligations.*

-   *Coordinating Australia’s domestic civil space sector activities.*

-   *Supporting the growth of Australia’s space industry and the use of
    space across the broader economy.*

-   *Leading international civil space engagement.*

-   *Inspiring the Australian community and the next generation of space
    entrepreneurs.*

The Agency has six primary responsibilities:

Providing national policy and strategic advice on the civil space
sector.

Coordinating Australia’s domestic civil space sector activities.

Supporting the growth of Australia’s space industry and the use of space
across the broader economy.

Leading international civil space engagement.

Administering space activities legislation and delivering on our
international obligations.

Inspiring the Australian community and the next generation of space
entrepreneurs.

In keeping with the above responsibilities, it is different from other
established space programs in that it exists to promote private
development and businesses.

History
=======

-   *In 2009, the Space Policy Unit funded the Australian Space Research
    Program over three years.*

-   *The budget was criticised for being inadequate by private
    Australian space companies including Delta-V and Gilmour Space
    Technologies and space historian Alice Gorman noted that low budget
    attempts at starting an Australian space agency have failed in the
    past.*

As of 2008, Australia was the only OECD country without a space agency,
with the preceding Australian Space Office (ASO) having been disbanded
by the federal government in 1996.\[citation needed\]

In 2009, the Space Policy Unit funded the Australian Space Research
Program over three years.

On 25 September 2017, at the International Astronautical Congress in
Adelaide, Senator Simon Birmingham announced that the Australian
Government would be launching a national space agency following an
expert reference group investigation led by Dr. Megan Clark, ex-chief
executive of CSIRO.

As part of the Australian Government's 2018 budget announcement, \$26m
in seed funding over four years from 2018 was included to establish the
Australian Space Agency, with a further \$15m for international space
investment starting from 2019.

The budget was criticised for being inadequate by private Australian
space companies including Delta-V and Gilmour Space Technologies and
space historian Alice Gorman noted that low budget attempts at starting
an Australian space agency have failed in the past.

On 14 May 2018, Senator Michaelia Cash officially announced the launch
of the Australian Space Agency, identifying 1 July 2018 as the
commencement date of the agency. It will be located with the Industry
Department in Canberra, and Dr. Megan Clark will be the inaugural Chief
Executive of the agency for at least the first year.

On 12 December 2018, Prime Minister Scott Morrison officially announced
that Adelaide would become home to the Australian Space Agency. It will
be located at Lot Fourteen, the site of the former Royal Adelaide
Hospital in 2019.

Agency executives
=================

See also
========

-   *List of government space agencies*

Australia's Satellite Utilisation Policy

List of government space agencies

Woomera Rocket Range Complex

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Official Website*

Official Website
