**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bar%20mitzvah\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Bar and bat mitzvah
===================

-   *According to Jewish law, when a Jewish boy is 13 years old, he
    becomes accountable for his actions and becomes a bar mitzvah.*

-   *The plural is b'nai mitzvah for boys, and b'not mitzvah (Ashkenazi
    pronunciation: b'nos mitzvah) for girls.*

-   *Bat mitzvah (Hebrew: בַּת מִצְוָה; Ashkenazi pronunciation: bas
    mitzvah) is a Jewish coming of age ritual for girls.*

Bar mitzvah (Hebrew: .mw-parser-output .script-hebrew,.mw-parser-output
.script-Hebr{font-size:1.15em;font-family:"Ezra SIL","Ezra SIL
SR","Keter Aram Tsova","Taamey Ashkenaz","Taamey David CLM","Taamey
Frank CLM","Frank Ruehl CLM","Keter YG","Shofar","David CLM","Hadasim
CLM","Simple CLM","Nachlieli","SBL BibLit","SBL Hebrew",Cardo,Alef,"Noto
Serif Hebrew","Noto Sans Hebrew","David Libre",David,"Times New
Roman",Gisha,Arial,FreeSerif,FreeSans}בַּר מִצְוָה) is a Jewish coming
of age ritual for boys. Bat mitzvah (Hebrew: בַּת מִצְוָה; Ashkenazi
pronunciation: bas mitzvah) is a Jewish coming of age ritual for girls.
The plural is b'nai mitzvah for boys, and b'not mitzvah (Ashkenazi
pronunciation: b'nos mitzvah) for girls.

According to Jewish law, when a Jewish boy is 13 years old, he becomes
accountable for his actions and becomes a bar mitzvah. A girl becomes a
bat mitzvah at the age of 12 according to Orthodox and Conservative
Jews, and at the age of 13 according to Reform Jews. Before the child
reaches bar-mitzvah age, parents hold the responsibility for their
child's actions. After this age, the boys and girls bear their own
responsibility for Jewish ritual law, tradition, and ethics, and are
able to participate in all areas of Jewish community life.
Traditionally, the father of the bar mitzvah gives thanks to God that he
is no longer punished for the child's sins. In addition to being
considered accountable for their actions from a religious perspective, a
thirteen-year-old male may be counted towards an Orthodox prayer quorum
and may lead prayer and other religious services in the family and the
community.

Bar mitzvah is mentioned in the Mishnah (Ethics of the Fathers, 5:21)
and in the Talmud. In some classic sources, the age of 13 appears for
instance as the age from which males must fast on the Day of Atonement,
while females fast from the age of 12. The age of B'nai mitzvah roughly
coincides with physical puberty. The bar or bat mitzvah ceremony is
usually held on the first Shabbat after a boy's thirteenth and a girl's
twelfth birthday (or thirteenth in Reform congregations).

Etymology
=========

-   *Bar (בַּר) is a Jewish Babylonian Aramaic word meaning "son"
    (בֵּן), while bat (בַּת) means "daughter" in Hebrew, and mitzvah
    (מִצְוָה) means "commandment" or "law" (plural: mitzvot).*

-   *Bar mitzvah therefore translates to "a \[agent\] who is subject to
    the law".*

-   *Thus bar mitzvah and bat mitzvah literally translate to "son of
    commandment" and "daughter of commandment".*

Bar (בַּר) is a Jewish Babylonian Aramaic word meaning "son" (בֵּן),
while bat (בַּת) means "daughter" in Hebrew, and mitzvah (מִצְוָה) means
"commandment" or "law" (plural: mitzvot). Thus bar mitzvah and bat
mitzvah literally translate to "son of commandment" and "daughter of
commandment". However, in rabbinical usage, the word bar means "under
the category of" or "subject to". Bar mitzvah therefore translates to "a
\[agent\] who is subject to the law". Although the term is commonly used
to refer to the ritual itself, in fact, the phrase originally refers to
the person.

History
=======

-   *The modern method of celebrating becoming a bar mitzvah did not
    exist in the time of the Hebrew Bible, Mishnah or Talmud.*

The modern method of celebrating becoming a bar mitzvah did not exist in
the time of the Hebrew Bible, Mishnah or Talmud. Early rabbinic sources
specify 13 as the age at which a boy becomes a legal adult; however, the
celebration of this occasion is not mentioned until the Middle Ages.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="4.2625in" height="5.5in"}\
*Bar Mitzvah in a Synagogue by Oscar Rex*

Age thirteen
============

-   *The age of thirteen is mentioned in the Mishnah as the time one is
    obligated to observe the Torah's commandments: "At five years old
    one should study the Scriptures, at ten years for the Mishnah, at 13
    for the commandments..."*

-   *The Bible does not explicitly specify the age thirteen.*

-   *Other sources also list thirteen as the age of majority with
    respect to following the commandments of the Torah, including:*

The Bible does not explicitly specify the age thirteen. Passages in the
books of Exodus and Numbers note the age of majority for army service as
twenty. Machzor Vitri notes that Genesis 34:25 refers to Levi as a
"man", when a calculation from other verses suggests that Levi was aged
thirteen at the time.

The age of thirteen is mentioned in the Mishnah as the time one is
obligated to observe the Torah's commandments: "At five years old one
should study the Scriptures, at ten years for the Mishnah, at 13 for the
commandments..."

Elsewhere, the Mishna lists the ages (13 for boys and 12 for girls) at
which a vow is considered automatically valid; the Talmud explains this
as a result of the 13-year-old being a "man", as required in Numbers
6:2. (For one year before this age, the vows are conditionally valid,
depending on whether the boy or girl has signs of physical maturity.)

Other sources also list thirteen as the age of majority with respect to
following the commandments of the Torah, including:

"Why is the evil inclination personified as the great king (Ecclesiastes
9:14)? Because it is thirteen years older than the good inclination."
That is to say, one's good inclination begins to act upon reaching the
age of majority.

According to Pirke Rabbi Eli'ezer 26, Abraham rejected the idolatry of
his father and became a worshiper of God when he was thirteen years old.

The term "bar mitzvah"
======================

-   *The term "bar mitzvah" appears first in the Talmud, meaning "one
    who is subject to the law", though it does not refer to age.*

-   *The term "bar mitzvah", in reference to age, cannot be clearly
    traced earlier than the 14th century, the older rabbinical term
    being "gadol" (adult) or "bar 'onshin" (one legally responsible for
    own misdoings).*

The term "bar mitzvah" appears first in the Talmud, meaning "one who is
subject to the law", though it does not refer to age. The term "bar
mitzvah", in reference to age, cannot be clearly traced earlier than the
14th century, the older rabbinical term being "gadol" (adult) or "bar
'onshin" (one legally responsible for own misdoings).

The bar mitzvah celebration
===========================

-   *"It is a mitzvah for a person to make a meal on the day his son
    becomes Bar Mitzvah as on the day he enters the wedding canopy."*

-   *Many sources indicate that the ceremonial observation of a bar
    mitzvah developed in the Middle Ages.*

-   *This seems to imply that, at the time of the composition of the
    Midrash the bar mitzvah publicly pronounced a benediction on the
    occasion of his entrance upon maturity.*

Many sources indicate that the ceremonial observation of a bar mitzvah
developed in the Middle Ages.

Some late midrashic sources, and some medieval sources refer to a
synagogue ceremony performed upon the boy's reaching age thirteen:

Simon Tzemach Duran quotes a Midrash interpreting the Hebrew word zo
("this") in Isaiah 43:21 ("These people have I formed for myself, they
shall speak my praise") as referring by its numerical value to those
that have reached the age of 13. This seems to imply that, at the time
of the composition of the Midrash the bar mitzvah publicly pronounced a
benediction on the occasion of his entrance upon maturity.

The Midrash Hashkem: "The heathen when he begets a son consecrates him
to idolatrous practices; the Israelite has his son circumcised and the
rite of 'pidyon haben' performed; and as soon as he becomes of age he
brings him into the synagogue and school in order that he may praise the
name of God, reciting the 'Barekhu' (Benediction) preceding the reading
from the Law."

Masseket Soferim (18:5) makes matters even more explicit: "In Jerusalem
they are accustomed to initiate their children to fast on the Day of
Atonement, a year or two before their maturity; and then, when the age
has arrived, to bring the Bar Mitzvah before the priest or elder for
blessing, encouragement, and prayer, that he may be granted a portion in
the Law and in the doing of good works. Whosoever is of superiority in
the town is expected to pray for him as he bows down to him to receive
his blessing."

Genesis Rabbah, commenting upon Genesis 25:27, says: "Up to thirteen
years Esau and Jacob went together to the primary school and back home;
after the thirteen years were over, the one went to the beit midrash to
study Law, the other to the house of idols. Regarding this, Rabbi
Eleazar remarks, 'Until the thirteenth year it is the father's duty to
train his boy; after this, he must say: "Blessed be He who has taken
from me the responsibility \[the punishment\] for this boy!"

Later on, are references to a festive celebration on this occasion:

"It is a mitzvah for a person to make a meal on the day his son becomes
Bar Mitzvah as on the day he enters the wedding canopy."

Significance
============

-   *Reaching the age of bar or bat Mitzvah signifies becoming a
    full-fledged member of the Jewish community with the
    responsibilities that come with it.*

-   *Yet the enduring popularity of bar/bat mitzvah prevailed and today,
    in our communities, bar/bat mitzvah is 'virtually universally
    observed' by Reform Jews."*

Reaching the age of bar or bat Mitzvah signifies becoming a full-fledged
member of the Jewish community with the responsibilities that come with
it. These include moral responsibility for one's own actions;
eligibility to be called to read from the Torah and lead or participate
in a minyan; the right to possess personal property and to legally marry
on one's own according to Jewish law; the duty to follow the 613 laws of
the Torah and keep the halakha; and the capacity to testify as a witness
in a beth din (rabbinical court) case.

Many congregations require pre-bar mitzvah children to attend a minimum
number of Shabbat prayer services at the synagogue, study at a Hebrew
school, take on a charity or community service project and maintain
membership in good standing with the synagogue. In addition to study and
preparation offered through the synagogue and Hebrew schools, bar
mitzvah tutors may be hired to prepare the child through the study of
Hebrew, Torah cantillation and basic Jewish concepts.

According to Rabbi Mark Washofsky, "The Reform Movement in North America
has struggled over the bar/bat mitzvah. At one time, this ceremony was
on the verge of extinction in Reform congregations. Most of them
preferred to replace bar/bat mitzvah with confirmation, which they
considered a more enlightened and appropriate ceremony for modern Jews.
Yet the enduring popularity of bar/bat mitzvah prevailed and today, in
our communities, bar/bat mitzvah is 'virtually universally observed' by
Reform Jews."

In 2012, concern about the high post-bar/bat mitzvah drop out rate led
the Union for Reform Judaism to launch the B'nai Mitzvah Revolution, an
effort to shift Reform congregations away from "the long-held assumption
that religious school is about preparing kids for their bar/bat mitzvah"
and focus instead on teaching them how to become committed and involved
members of the Jewish community.

Aliyah to the Torah
===================

-   *However, this does not delay the onset of rights and
    responsibilities of being a Jewish adult which comes about strictly
    by virtue of age.*

-   *He may also give a d'var Torah (a discussion of some Torah issue,
    such as a discussion of that week's Torah portion) and/or lead part
    or all of the prayer services.*

The widespread practice is that on a Sabbath shortly after he has
attained the age of thirteen, a boy is called up to read from the weekly
portion of the Law (Torah), either as one of the first seven men or as
the last, in which case he will read the closing verses and the Haftarah
(selections from the books of the Prophets); and if he is unable to
read, to recite at least the benediction before and after the reading.
He may also give a d'var Torah (a discussion of some Torah issue, such
as a discussion of that week's Torah portion) and/or lead part or all of
the prayer services.

In Orthodox circles, the occasion is sometimes celebrated during a
weekday service that includes reading from the Torah, such as a Monday
or Thursday morning service.

Some communities or families may delay the celebration for reasons such
as availability of a Shabbat during which no other celebration has been
scheduled, or due to the desire to permit the family to travel to the
event. However, this does not delay the onset of rights and
responsibilities of being a Jewish adult which comes about strictly by
virtue of age.

Tefillin
========

-   *The common custom is for the bar mitzvah boy to begin putting on
    tefillin one to three months before his bar mitzvah.*

-   *The obligation to lay tefillin begins when a boy reaches bar
    mitzvah age.*

The obligation to lay tefillin begins when a boy reaches bar mitzvah
age. The common custom is for the bar mitzvah boy to begin putting on
tefillin one to three months before his bar mitzvah. This way, by the
time he is obligated in the commandment, he will already know how to
fulfil it properly.

Parties
=======

-   *In the 1950s, Rabbi Harold Saperstein of New York described them as
    too often being "more bar than mitzvah".*

-   *Some of the efforts of early Reform in favor of confirmation
    against bar mitzvah were prompted by the extravagant celebration of
    bar mitzvah, which had removed its primary religious significance.*

The first mention of a party associated with a synagogue bar mitzvah was
in the 13th century, so throwing some sort of party is traditional and
frequently seen as necessary.

Bar mitzvah festivities typically include a joyous seudat mitzvah, a
celebratory meal with family, friends, and members of the community, the
Bar Mitzvah boy delivering on this occasion a learned discourse or
oration at the table before the invited guests, who offer him presents,
while the rabbi or teacher gives him his blessing, accompanying it at
times with an address.\
Others may celebrate in different ways such as taking the bar or bat
mitzvah on a special trip or organizing some special event in the
celebrant's honour. In many communities, the celebrant is given a
certificate. According to the Orthodox view, the bar mitzvah boy is so
happy to be commanded to do mitzvot and earn a reward in the next world
for his efforts, that he throws a party and has a festive meal.\[dubious
– discuss\]

In some times and places, local Jewish leaders have formally limited the
size and elaborateness of mitzvahs. For example, only ten men were
permitted to attend the party in 1730 in Berlin, and the music was
banned at these parties in 1767 in Prague. These rules were usually
meant to avoid offending non-Jewish neighbours, and to maintain the rule
that it was a smaller celebration than a wedding.

Bar and bat mitzvah parties in America are often lavish affairs held at
hotels and country clubs with hundreds of guests. The trend has been
mocked, most notably in the movie Keeping Up with the Steins. In the
1950s, Rabbi Harold Saperstein of New York described them as too often
being "more bar than mitzvah". Rabbi Shmuley Boteach says that
over-the-top bar mitzvah parties were already common when he was growing
up in Miami in the 1970s.

In 1979, the Responsa Committee of the Central Conference of American
Rabbis addressed the Reform attitude toward bar/bat mitzvah: "Every
effort should be exerted to maintain the family festivities in the
religious mood at the bar/bat mitzvah. Some of the efforts of early
Reform in favor of confirmation against bar mitzvah were prompted by the
extravagant celebration of bar mitzvah, which had removed its primary
religious significance. We vigorously oppose such excesses, as they
destroy the meaning of bar/bat mitzvah."

In May, 1992, the board of trustees of the Union of American Hebrew
Congregations (now the Union for Reform Judaism), the synagogue arm of
the Reform Movement, unanimously passed a resolution decrying "excesses
of wasteful consumption...glitzy theme events, sophisticated
entertainment...and expensive party favors", calling instead for "family
cohesion, authentic friendship, acts of tzedakah (righteous giving), and
parties suitable for children."

The cost of the party depends upon what the family is willing and able
to spend. Some very wealthy families spend tens, or even hundreds, of
thousands of dollars on the party. Generally speaking, these
celebrations are not quite as expensive or as elaborate as a wedding in
that family. In addition to food and drink for the guests, the money at
an elaborate party is mostly spent on renting and decorating a venue and
hiring workers, from the catering staff to emcees, DJs, entertainers and
dancers (also called "motivators") to encourage the guests to dance or
play games.

Bat Mitzvah customs
===================

-   *There were also bat mitzvah rituals held in the 19th century in
    Iraq.*

-   *At the time, most Orthodox rabbis strongly rejected the idea of a
    bat mitzvah ceremony.*

-   *In Orthodox communities, a Bat Mitzvah is celebrated when a girl
    reaches the age of 12.*

-   *Today many non-Orthodox Jews celebrate a girl's bat mitzvah in the
    same way as a boy's bar mitzvah.*

Today many non-Orthodox Jews celebrate a girl's bat mitzvah in the same
way as a boy's bar mitzvah. All Reform and Reconstructionist, and most
Conservative synagogues have egalitarian participation, in which women
read from the Torah and lead services. In Orthodox communities, a Bat
Mitzvah is celebrated when a girl reaches the age of 12.

The majority of Orthodox and some Conservative Jews reject the idea that
a woman can publicly read from the Torah or lead prayer services
whenever there is a minyan (quorum of 10 males) available to do so.
However, the public celebration of a girl becoming bat mitzvah in other
ways has made strong inroads into Modern Orthodox Judaism and also into
some elements of Haredi Judaism. In these congregations, women do not
read from the Torah or lead prayer services, but they occasionally
lecture on a Jewish topic to mark their coming of age, learn a book of
Tanakh, recite verses from the Book of Esther or the Book of Psalms, or
say prayers from the siddur. In some Modern Orthodox circles, bat
mitzvah girls will read from the Torah and lead prayer services in a
women's tefillah. Rabbi Moshe Feinstein, a prominent Orthodox posek, has
ruled that bat mitzvah celebrations are permissible, but should not be
held in a synagogue, because then they would be construed as imitating
Reform and Conservative customs; in any case, they do not have the
status of seudat mitzvah. Rabbi Ovadiah Yosef holds that it is a seudat
mitzvah.

There were occasional attempts to recognize a girl's coming of age in
eastern Europe in the 19th and 20th centuries, the former in Warsaw
(1843) and the latter in Lemberg (1902). The occasion was marked by a
party without any ritual in the synagogue.

According to the archivist at the Great Synagogue in Rome, the custom of
a young woman being called up in synagogue before the entire community
dates back to the early years of the Roman Jewish community
approximately 2,300 years ago. The community recognized her as "being of
age" and acknowledged her in a public fashion. This would support more
modern documents that record an Orthodox Jewish Italian rite for
becoming bat mitzvah (which involved an "entrance into the minyan"
ceremony, in which boys of thirteen and girls of twelve recited a
blessing) since the mid-19th century. There were also bat mitzvah
rituals held in the 19th century in Iraq. All this may have influenced
the American rabbi Mordecai M. Kaplan, who held the first public
celebration of a bat mitzvah in the United States, for his daughter
Judith, on March 18, 1922, at the Society for the Advancement of
Judaism, his synagogue in New York City. Judith Kaplan recited the
preliminary blessing, read a portion of that week's Torah portion in
Hebrew and English, and then intoned the closing blessing. Mordecai
Kaplan, an Orthodox rabbi who joined Conservative Judaism and then
became the founder of Reconstructionist Judaism, influenced Jews from
all branches of non-Orthodox Judaism, through his position at the Jewish
Theological Seminary of America. At the time, most Orthodox rabbis
strongly rejected the idea of a bat mitzvah ceremony.\[citation needed\]

As the ceremony became accepted for females as well as males, many women
chose to celebrate the ceremony even though they were much older, as a
way of formalizing and celebrating their place in the adult Jewish
community.

Alternative ceremonies
======================

-   *A Bark Mitzvah is a pseudo-traditional observance and celebration
    of a dog's coming of age, as in the Jewish traditional bar mitzvah
    and bat mitzvah.*

-   *Today many kibbutz children are opting for a more traditional bar
    mitzvah celebration.*

-   *The kibbutz movement in Israel also encouraged the celebration of
    the bar mitzvah.*

Instead of reading from the Torah, some Humanist Jews prefer a research
paper on a topic in Jewish history to mark their coming of age. Secular
Jewish Sunday schools and communities—including those affiliated with
the Congress of Secular Jewish Organizations and the Arbeiter Ring
(Workmen's Circle)—encourage the youngsters to select any topic that
interests them and relates to the Jewish part of their identities.

The kibbutz movement in Israel also encouraged the celebration of the
bar mitzvah. All those coming of age in the community for that year
would take on a project and research in a topic of Jewish or Zionist
interest. Today many kibbutz children are opting for a more traditional
bar mitzvah celebration.\[citation needed\]

Among some Jews, a man who has reached the age of 83 will celebrate a
second bar mitzvah, under the logic that in the Torah it says that a
normal lifespan is 70 years, so that an 83-year-old can be considered 13
in a second lifetime. This ritual is becoming more common as people live
longer, healthier lives.

A Bark Mitzvah is a pseudo-traditional observance and celebration of a
dog's coming of age, as in the Jewish traditional bar mitzvah and bat
mitzvah. The term has been in use since at least as early as 1997, and
Bark Mitzvahs are sometimes held as an adjunct to the festival of Purim.

Gifts
=====

-   *Jewelry is a common gift for girls at a bat mitzvah celebration.*

-   *Monetary gifts in multiples of 18 are considered to be particularly
    auspicious and have become very common for the bar and bat mitzvah.*

-   *Bar or bat mitzvah celebrations have become an occasion to give the
    celebrant a commemorative gift.*

-   *Another gift for the bat mitzvah girl are Shabbat candlesticks
    because it is the duty and honour of the woman to light the
    candles.*

Bar or bat mitzvah celebrations have become an occasion to give the
celebrant a commemorative gift. Traditionally, common gifts include
books with religious or educational value, religious items, writing
implements, savings bonds (to be used for the child's college
education), gift certificates, or money. Gifts of cash have become
commonplace in recent times.\[when?\] As with charity and all other
gifts, it has become common to give in multiples of 18, since the
gematria, or numerical equivalent of the Hebrew word for "life",
("chai"), is the number 18. Monetary gifts in multiples of 18 are
considered to be particularly auspicious and have become very common for
the bar and bat mitzvah. Many b'nai mitzvah also receive their first
tallit from their parents to be used for the occasion and tefillin where
this is appropriate. Jewelry is a common gift for girls at a bat mitzvah
celebration. Another gift for the bat mitzvah girl are Shabbat
candlesticks because it is the duty and honour of the woman to light the
candles.\[citation needed\]

In adults
=========

-   *Since the 1970s, adult bar and bat mitzvah have been growing in
    popularity.*

-   *While the traditional age to hold a Bar or Bat mitzvah is 13 for
    boys and 12 or 13 for girls, some adults choose to have a Bar or Bat
    Mitzvah if they did not have them as children.*

While the traditional age to hold a Bar or Bat mitzvah is 13 for boys
and 12 or 13 for girls, some adults choose to have a Bar or Bat Mitzvah
if they did not have them as children. Since the 1970s, adult bar and
bat mitzvah have been growing in popularity.\[citation needed\]

Bar and bat barakah
===================

-   *In honour and recognition of Jewish traditions, including zeved
    habat and bar and bat mitzvah, some Christians have begun to conduct
    a bar and bat barakah ceremony to pronounce blessings upon their
    children.*

Bar/bat barakah means, in Aramaic, "son/daughter of the blessing". In
honour and recognition of Jewish traditions, including zeved habat and
bar and bat mitzvah, some Christians have begun to conduct a bar and bat
barakah ceremony to pronounce blessings upon their children.

See also
========

-   *Brit milah*

-   *Confirmation*

Brit milah

Confirmation

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *Thirteen and a Day: The Bar and Bat Mitzvah across America.*

-   *"Bar Mitzvah, Bat Mitzvah".*

-   *Bar Mitzvah: A History.*

Goldberg, Harvey E. "Rites of Passage: Jewish Rites". Encyclopedia of
Religion. Ed. Lindsay Jones. 2nd ed. Vol. 11. Detroit: Macmillan
Reference, 2005. pp. 7818–7824. Gale Virtual Reference Library.

Golding, Nora. Bat Mitzvahs in America. Lulu, 2015.
ISBN 978-1-312-92108-5.

Hilton, Michael. Bar Mitzvah: A History. University of Nebraska Press,
2014.

Kaplan, Zvi, and Norma Baumel Joseph. "Bar Mitzvah, Bat Mitzvah".
Encyclopaedia Judaica. Ed. Michael Berenbaum and Fred Skolnik. 2nd ed.
Vol. 3. Detroit: Macmillan Reference, 2007. pp. 164–167. Gale Virtual
Reference Library.

Oppenheimer, Mark. Thirteen and a Day: The Bar and Bat Mitzvah across
America. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2005.

Vinick, Barbara and Shulamit Reinharz. Today I Am a Woman: Stories of
Bat Mitzvah around the World. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University
Press, 2011. ISBN 978-0253356932.

External links
==============

-   *Judaism 101: Bar Mitzvah, Bat Mitzvah and Confirmation*

Judaism 101: Bar Mitzvah, Bat Mitzvah and Confirmation

Bar mitzvah
===========

-   *Media related to Bar Mitzvah at Wikimedia Commons*

-   *My Jewish Learning – What Does Bar Mitzvah Mean?*

-   *Chabad's Becoming a Bar Mitzvah*

Media related to Bar Mitzvah at Wikimedia Commons

Chabad's Becoming a Bar Mitzvah

My Jewish Learning – What Does Bar Mitzvah Mean?

Bat mitzvah
===========

-   *My Jewish Learning – History of Bat Mitzvah*

-   *Chabad's Becoming a Bat Mitzvah*

-   *Bat Mitzvah Clubs International*

-   *Media related to Bat Mitzvah at Wikimedia Commons*

Media related to Bat Mitzvah at Wikimedia Commons

Chabad's Becoming a Bat Mitzvah

Bat Mitzvah Clubs International

My Jewish Learning – History of Bat Mitzvah
