**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beale%27s\_Wagon\_Road\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="4.216666666666667in" height="5.5in"}\
*Edward Fitzgerald Beale (1822−1893)*

Beale's Wagon Road
==================

-   *The location where Beale crossed the river from Arizona to
    California, up river from present-day Needles, California, became
    known as Beale's Crossing.*

-   *Beale's route continued west through Southern California from where
    Beale's road crossed the Colorado River, through the Mojave Desert
    along the routes of the Mojave Trail, and Old Spanish Trail to the
    Mojave River where it crossed the Mormon Road that led to Los
    Angeles, then crossed the western Mojave Desert to Fort Tejon and
    the Stockton - Los Angeles Road, and the less traveled El Camino
    Viejo, both of which led to the northern parts of California through
    the San Joaquin Valley.*

In October 1857, an expedition led by Edward Fitzgerald Beale was tasked
with establishing a trade route along the 35th parallel from Fort Smith,
Arkansas to Los Angeles, California.

The wagon trail began at Fort Smith and continued through the New Mexico
Territory to Fort Defiance. He then continued west over what is now
northern Arizona to Beale Spring near modern Kingman and Sitgreaves Pass
before crossing the Colorado River. The location where Beale crossed the
river from Arizona to California, up river from present-day Needles,
California, became known as Beale's Crossing. Beale's route continued
west through Southern California from where Beale's road crossed the
Colorado River, through the Mojave Desert along the routes of the Mojave
Trail, and Old Spanish Trail to the Mojave River where it crossed the
Mormon Road that led to Los Angeles, then crossed the western Mojave
Desert to Fort Tejon and the Stockton - Los Angeles Road, and the less
traveled El Camino Viejo, both of which led to the northern parts of
California through the San Joaquin Valley.

Background
==========

-   *Beale's Wagon Road would eventually be supplanted by the railroad
    in the early 1880s, then U.S. Route 66 in 1926, and Interstate 40
    in 1978.*

-   *It crosses the great desert (which must be crossed by any road to
    California) at its narrowest point."*

-   *Beale described the route, "It is the shortest from our western
    frontier by 300 miles (480 km), being nearly directly west.*

Beale described the route, "It is the shortest from our western frontier
by 300 miles (480 km), being nearly directly west. It is the most level:
our wagons only double-teaming once in the entire distance, and that at
a short hill, and over a surface heretofore unbroken by wheels or trail
on any kind. It is well-watered: our greatest distance without water at
any time being 20 miles (32 km). It is well-timbered, and in many places
the growth is far beyond that of any part of the world I have ever seen.
It is temperate in climate, passing for the most part over an elevated
region. It is salubrious: not one of our party requiring the slightest
medical attendance from the time of our leaving to our arrival ... It
crosses the great desert (which must be crossed by any road to
California) at its narrowest point." Beale's Wagon Road would eventually
be supplanted by the railroad in the early 1880s, then U.S. Route 66 in
1926, and Interstate 40 in 1978.

Beale's recommendations
=======================

-   *Beale suggested that, in addition to a military fort, the route was
    also in immediate need of bridges and dams to ensure safe travel and
    provide a reliable water supply; he requested \$100,000 to fund the
    improvements.*

-   *After his initial survey of the road, E.F. Beale went in
    Washington, D.C. to make recommendations to members of Congress and
    the War Department:*

After his initial survey of the road, E.F. Beale went in Washington,
D.C. to make recommendations to members of Congress and the War
Department:

.mw-parser-output .templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0
40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote
.templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}I
regard the establishment of a military post on the Colorado River as an
indispensable necessity for the emigrant over this road; for although
the Indians living in the rich meadow lands are agricultural, and
consequently peaceable, they are very numerous, so much so that we
counted 800 men around our camp on the second day after our arrival on
the banks of the river. The temptation of scattered emigrant parties
with their families, and the confusion of inexperienced teamsters,
rafting so wide and rapid a river with their wagons and families, would
offer too strong a temptation for the Indians to withstand.\[7\]

Beale suggested that, in addition to a military fort, the route was also
in immediate need of bridges and dams to ensure safe travel and provide
a reliable water supply; he requested \$100,000 to fund the
improvements.

References
==========

Bibliography
============
