**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernard%20Lee%20%28activist%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Bernard Lee (activist)
======================

-   *He was key associate of Martin Luther King Jr.*

-   *Bernard Lee (October 2, 1935 – February 10, 1991) was an activist
    and member of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference during
    the Civil Rights Movement.*

Bernard Lee (October 2, 1935 – February 10, 1991) was an activist and
member of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference during the Civil
Rights Movement. He was key associate of Martin Luther King Jr.

Civil Rights Movement
=====================

-   *According to historian Taylor Branch: "Lee had already come to
    dress like King, walk like King, and even to imitate King's long,
    measured phrases."*

-   *Lee was closer to King than any other member of the Civil Rights
    Movement, so much that by some accounts he began to identify with
    King completely.*

-   *Lee began his civil rights career as a student at Alabama State
    College, from which he was expelled after leading more than half the
    student body in a march on the Alabama capitol.*

Lee began his civil rights career as a student at Alabama State College,
from which he was expelled after leading more than half the student body
in a march on the Alabama capitol. During demonstrations for equal
library access in 1960, he said: "My grandfather had only a prayer to
help him. I have a prayer and an education."

Bernard Lee was a courageous student activist, a founding member of the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). While attending
Alabama State University (ASU), he led a sit-in at the Alabama state
capitol cafeteria. He was expelled from ASU for the event after the
governor threatened the university president, saying he would withhold
funding from the HBCU if Lee was not expelled. So, he transferred to
Morris Brown College in Atlanta, Georgia to work with the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) and Martin Luther King Jr, where
he contributed to the Poor People’s Campaign and was at King's side
after his assassination. Lee later worked for the U.S. Government under
President Carter and for Washington D.C. under Mayor Barry (Source NAACP
2014) (http://www.blackpast.org/aah/morris-brown-college-1885)

Lee was King's personal assistant and traveling companion for many
years. He was arrested with King in 1960 and left the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in 1961 so that he could work full-time
with King and the SCLC. He participated in the 1961 freedom rides and
helped to orchestrate the Birmingham Campaign in 1963. He went to
Chicago with King in 1965. In January 1967, he was one of few in to
accompany King to Jamaica while he wrote Where Do We Go From Here?

Lee was closer to King than any other member of the Civil Rights
Movement, so much that by some accounts he began to identify with King
completely. According to historian Taylor Branch: "Lee had already come
to dress like King, walk like King, and even to imitate King's long,
measured phrases."

Lee worked on the Poor People's Campaign after King's death in 1968. He
also became vice president of the SCLC, which diminished in power over
the following years.

Lee was directly privy to FBI targeting of King under COINTELPRO, having
been present when King received a letter from the FBI urging him to
commit suicide. Lee sued the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in
1977 in an effort to force the release of recordings of King, collected
by FBI wiretaps and bugs. Judge John Lewis denied the request and
ordered the records sealed for 50 years.

Later life
==========

-   *Lee worked during the Carter administration as a civil rights
    advisor to the Environmental Protection Agency.*

-   *Lee died of heart failure in 1991.*

-   *Lee criticized Abernathy's book, which supported rumors about
    King's extramarital sex life.*

Lee worked during the Carter administration as a civil rights advisor to
the Environmental Protection Agency. During this time he joined with
other Black members of the administration to express concern over its
policies toward Africa and African Americans.

In 1985, Lee received a master's degree in Divinity from Howard
University, and became the chaplain at Lorton Prison in Virginia.

In 1989, he was involved in a public dispute with Ralph Abernathy over
Abernathy's book And the Walls Came Tumbling Down. Lee criticized
Abernathy's book, which supported rumors about King's extramarital sex
life.

Lee died of heart failure in 1991.

See also
========

-   *Timeline of the civil rights movement*

Andrew Young

Timeline of the civil rights movement

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Photos of Lee at the Atlanta History Center*

-   *Lee clears a path for King during the most chaotic event of the
    Memphis Sanitation Strike*

Photos of Lee at the Atlanta History Center

Lee clears a path for King during the most chaotic event of the Memphis
Sanitation Strike
