**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bobby%20Jindal%202016%20presidential%20campaign\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Bobby Jindal 2016 presidential campaign
=======================================

-   *On November 17, 2015, Jindal announced that he was suspending his
    campaign for president.*

-   *The 2016 presidential campaign of Bobby Jindal, the 55th Governor
    of Louisiana, was announced on June 24, 2015.*

The 2016 presidential campaign of Bobby Jindal, the 55th Governor of
Louisiana, was announced on June 24, 2015. His candidacy for the
Republican nomination for President of the United States in the 2016
election came after several years of speculation following the 2012
election. Jindal is the first Indian American and third Asian American
to run for president of the United States.

On November 17, 2015, Jindal announced that he was suspending his
campaign for president.

Background
==========

-   *Some blamed Jindal for his refusal to answer questions about his
    religion and ethnic background brought up in several Democratic
    advertisements, which the Jindal campaign called "negative attack
    ads."*

-   *Despite losing the election, Jindal became a well-known figure on
    the state's political scene and a rising star within the Republican
    Party as a result of his campaign.*

Jindal came to national prominence during the 2003 election for
Louisiana governor.

In what Louisianans call an open primary (but is technically a
nonpartisan blanket primary), Jindal finished first with 33 percent of
the vote. He received endorsements from the largest newspaper in
Louisiana, the New Orleans Times-Picayune; the newly elected Democratic
mayor of New Orleans, Ray Nagin; and the outgoing Republican governor,
Mike Foster. In the general election, Jindal faced the outgoing
lieutenant governor, Kathleen Babineaux Blanco of Lafayette, a Democrat.
Despite winning in Blanco's hometown, he lost many normally conservative
parishes in northern Louisiana, and Blanco prevailed with 52 percent of
the popular vote.

Political analysts suggested two explanations for his loss. Some blamed
Jindal for his refusal to answer questions about his religion and ethnic
background brought up in several Democratic advertisements, which the
Jindal campaign called "negative attack ads." Others\[who?\] noted that
a significant number of conservative Louisianans remain more comfortable
voting for a conservative Democrat than for a Republican\[citation
needed\]. Despite losing the election, Jindal became a well-known figure
on the state's political scene and a rising star within the Republican
Party as a result of his campaign.

In 2004, Jindal ran for the House seat in Louisiana's First
Congressional District, winning with 78 percent of the vote. He was
re-elected in 2006.

In early 2007, Jindal announced his candidacy for governor of Louisiana
and became an early front-runner on the Republican side. In Louisiana's
blanket primary, he faced 11 opponents and received 54 percent of the
vote. Because he received a majority of votes in the primary, no runoff
was necessary. He was re-elected in a similar fashion in 2011, with 66
percent of the vote.

When he took office in January 2008, at age 36, Jindal became the first
Indian American governor and the youngest sitting governor in the United
States.

Campaign
========

-   *By early September 2015, Jindal was polling about 1 percent of the
    Republican primary electorate.*

-   *Jindal spoke positively at that time about his campaign in Iowa,
    stating that it was building a movement there and was present in
    every county.*

-   *Jindal's campaign slogan was "Tanned.*

-   *Jindal was the sole presidential candidate to not pose for a photo
    op with the other candidates.*

Jindal officially launched his campaign for the 2016 Republican
presidential nomination on June 24, 2015, with an announcement via
Twitter, ahead of a formal announcement in the New Orleans suburb of
Kenner later that day. Jindal also posted a hidden camera video to
Facebook that showed Jindal and wife, Supriya, announcing his intention
to run for President to their children. Jindal's children's relatively
muted reactions to the announcement helped the video go viral. The video
was later removed, and Jindal spokeswoman Shannon Dirmann claimed that
criticism of the video came largely from "liberals".

Aside from being the first Indian American to run for President of the
United States, Jindal was the first Asian American to mount a nationwide
campaign for president.

Jindal's campaign slogan was "Tanned. Rested. Ready." The slogan,
according to an email sent to his supporters, was meant to quell
criticism he had received from the media for distancing himself from his
Indian-American heritage. The email referred to those making the claims
as "the liberal media." The Nixon Foundation tweeted a message "pointing
out" that the slogan had originated from that of a satirical T-shirt
featuring Richard Nixon, initially made popular at the Republican
National Conference in 1988.

On August 3, Jindal appeared at a nationally televised forum, where he
expressed his disillusion with President Barack Obama. Jindal claimed
that Obama was trying to divide the country along with liberals,
insisting that the president was transforming "the American dream into
the European nightmare", a phrase that he was noted to have used
commonly. Jindal did not qualify for the first Republican debate on
August 6, averaging in 13th place in the polls used to determine the
invited candidates. Despite this, Jindal was allowed to participate in
the undercard debate, his performance being seen as favorable by Michele
Bachmann who claimed on Twitter after the debate that the millennials
she watched the debate with were favorable of Jindal. After Scott Walker
unveiled his health care plan on August 18, Jindal insisted that it was
similar to the Affordable Care Act and one of his staffers was reported
to as saying that Walker collaborated with Democratic presidential
candidate Bernie Sanders on the plan. On August 21, Jindal boasted that
he displayed what he called "videos uncovered" from Planned Parenthood
and furthered, "I'm here to tell you Planned Parenthood should not get
another dime of our taxpayer dollars." On August 30, Jindal claimed that
he was the only candidate in the Republican field that had reduced the
size of the government and said allowing immigrants to not "come here
legally, learn English, adopt our values, roll up our sleeves and get to
work" was invasive.

By early September 2015, Jindal was polling about 1 percent of the
Republican primary electorate. That month, Jindal criticized Republican
front-runner Donald Trump as having no substance and accused him of
being a "narcissist." He also released two videos online mocking Trump.
Trump responded by saying that he had never met Jindal, that he did not
believe Jindal had a chance of securing the Republican nomination, and
that he would "only respond to people that register more than 1 percent
in the polls." Previously, Jindal had called Trump an "unserious
carnival act," placing Jindal among a field of other Republican
presidential candidates—such as Jeb Bush, Rick Perry, and Rand Paul—who
had targeted Trump but had not surpassed him in any polls. Jindal spoke
positively at that time about his campaign in Iowa, stating that it was
building a movement there and was present in every county. He also
insisted that despite his low polling, he would not be the next
candidate to drop out after Scott Walker did so. There was speculation
that Jindal would be benefited by Walker's withdrawal from the race.

During the second Republican presidential debate, hosted by CNN, Jindal
criticized Republicans in Congress for not having "half the fight in
them the Senate Democrats did," and claimed—in an attempt to appeal to
anti-abortion conservatives—that he had defunded Planned Parenthood in
Louisiana as governor. Jindal was the sole presidential candidate to not
pose for a photo op with the other candidates. Jake Tapper of CNN said
he had opted to remain in the spin room.

On October 2, Jindal tweeted an accusation against Trump suggesting that
he was in favor of single payer healthcare system and charged Ted Cruz
with not showing "conservative leadership" in not opposing Trump for the
view. Jindal furthered that Cruz was only showing support of Trump
because he hoped to court his voters when he eventually dropped out of
the race.\
By mid-October, Jindal was speculated to be ending his campaign after
having only \$260,000 to spend at the end of the previous month and
spending significantly more than that of the third quarter's
fundraising, his amount raised noted as being lower than that of some of
his competitors and putting him in position to suspend his campaign
similarly to Rick Perry and Scott Walker once their fundraising was
unable to suffice. The lack of finances left Jindal in a worsened
financial position than previous competitors Rick Perry and Scott Walker
when they ended their campaigns the prior month.

On November 8, 2015, Jindal participated at the National Religious
Liberties Conference alongside Ted Cruz and Mike Huckabee, and said that
"Christians are under physical assault all over the world and Christian
values are under assault right here at home". Conservative radio host
Kevin Swanson, who hosted the conference, advocated for the execution of
homosexuals in his speech. Two other speakers at the conference,
Reverend Phillip Kayser and Joel McDurmon, have also spoken of the death
penalty for homosexual acts.

CNBC debate
===========

-   *Jindal was polling better in Iowa than he was nationally.*

Jindal was polling better in Iowa than he was nationally. Due to this, a
change in criteria would have benefitted him.

Movement in Iowa
================

-   *Only three weeks into his campaign, Jindal had visited the state
    four times.*

-   *In October 2015, Jindal said he believed his campaign was "doing
    very well" in the state and that he believed the race would change
    after the Iowa caucus.*

-   *Jindal has spoken several times of his campaign focusing on Iowa
    and building a movement there.*

-   *Jindal has taken off in Iowa.*

Jindal has spoken several times of his campaign focusing on Iowa and
building a movement there. Only three weeks into his campaign, Jindal
had visited the state four times. Jindal stated that he viewed directly
hearing from voters as the "only way to connect" with them. By October,
Jindal had held 96 events in the state in just 55 days.

The Jindal campaign noted that the candidate had a high favorability
rating among potential Republican voters that were surveyed. A poll on
July 22 showed Jindal was favored by these voters 51-7. Wes Anderson
wrote in an announcement of Jindal's favorability among voters in the
state, "Bottom line, Gov. Jindal has taken off in Iowa. No other
candidate has seen as much positive movement as Jindal." On September 1,
Iowa pollster J. Ann Selzer called Jindal the "hidden winner" for
increasing his favorability rating by 18 points since the last sampling
which she attributed to his increased profile, though noted it was not
translating into votes, adding, "He's kind of lurking there as having
some upside potential."\
In early November, Jindal was also found to have a 60% favorability in
Iowa, the third highest, only behind Ben Carson and Ted Cruz.

Jindal's polling in the state throughout the entirety of his campaign
ranged from the bottom of the field to average.\
A late July poll showed Jindal in fourth place, tied with Ben Carson. On
November 2, 2015, a poll was released with Jindal faring better than he
had previously been doing at 6%, noted by The Hill as being higher than
Jeb Bush who had consistently been polling superior to Jindal since the
announcement of his campaign months prior. On November 13, Jindal said
the poll was the result of him having visited all of the state's
counties and reported that his campaign was allowing everyone to ask
questions, even sacrificing time for their participation.

Despite low polling, Jindal publicly retained confidence in how he would
fare in Iowa. In October 2015, Jindal said he believed his campaign was
"doing very well" in the state and that he believed the race would
change after the Iowa caucus. In addition, he predicted that he would
win the state, which would "propel us forward to the nomination". Former
Iowa Republican political director Craig Robinson thought the campaign
marched around the state instead of with its denizens.

Had Jindal's prediction been correct, and he had won the state in
February, his campaign would have been faced with having to use the
victory to win the nomination, despite lacking in funds when compared to
other competitors within the field.

New Hampshire
=============

-   *Within the last three months of his campaign, Jindal did not visit
    New Hampshire, filing for the Republican Primary in the state on
    November 16, the day before announcing that he was suspending his
    campaign.*

-   *Jindal's last campaign trip to New Hampshire was on August 19,
    appearing at the state's annual Education Summit.*

The day after announcing his campaign, June 25, Jindal traveled to New
Hampshire, delivering a speech and insisting that he would return to the
state the following weekend.\
In June, Jindal was shown to have a 26% favorability rating among voters
in New Hampshire. On September 24, a CNN/WMUR poll was released showing
Jindal had increased in unfavorable opinion within New Hampshire by 14
points since that time, his favorability having dropped by a single
point. Jindal's last campaign trip to New Hampshire was on August 19,
appearing at the state's annual Education Summit. Within the last three
months of his campaign, Jindal did not visit New Hampshire, filing for
the Republican Primary in the state on November 16, the day before
announcing that he was suspending his campaign.

Suspension of campaign
======================

-   *After not receiving much traction, lack of fundraising, and an
    inability to get to the primetime debate stage, Jindal announced on
    November 17, 2015 that he was suspending his campaign for
    President.*

-   *Jindal stated about his campaign suspension, "This is not my
    time."*

After not receiving much traction, lack of fundraising, and an inability
to get to the primetime debate stage, Jindal announced on November 17,
2015 that he was suspending his campaign for President. Jindal stated
about his campaign suspension, "This is not my time." On February 5,
2016, Jindal endorsed Florida Senator Marco Rubio for the Republican
nomination, calling Rubio a "principled conservative" and "consistent
about strengthening America's foreign policy."

Endorsements
============

References
==========
