**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borrego\_Springs\_Fire\_Protection\_District\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Borrego Springs Fire Protection District
========================================

-   *The Borrego Springs Fire Protection District (BSFPD) provides fire
    protection and emergency medical services for the community of
    Borrego Springs, California.*

-   *The Fire District is governed by a voter elected five-member board
    which oversees operations and appoints the fire chief.*

The Borrego Springs Fire Protection District (BSFPD) provides fire
protection and emergency medical services for the community of Borrego
Springs, California. Borrego Springs is located in an unincorporated
area of San Diego County with 3,429 permanent residents as of the 2010
census. The Fire District operates with a career staff of 14 people that
provide training, maintenance, public safety education and
administrative services to the District. The Fire District is governed
by a voter elected five-member board which oversees operations and
appoints the fire chief.

Fire apparatus and stations
===========================

-   *The Fire District operates two Type I engines.*

-   *The engines comply with National Fire Protection Association
    standards for structural or wildland firefighting apparatus.*

-   *The Fire District operates a single 2010 Pierce wildland fire
    tender.*

-   *Additionally the department has a single type 3 fire engine or
    brush engine which is designed and operated for wildland fire
    response.*

The Fire District operates two Type I engines. The engines comply with
National Fire Protection Association standards for structural or
wildland firefighting apparatus. The engines have fire pumps that are
rated at 1,250 US gallons per minute (4,700 l/min) or above and carry
750 US gallons (2,800 l) of water. On-board Class AB foam capability is
standard on all engines. All engine companies carry a full complement of
auto extrication tools, high-angle rescue gear, and ALS or BLS emergency
medical equipment.

The Fire District operates two Advanced Life Support (ALS) paramedic
ambulances equipped for the treatment of medical and traumatic
emergencies for adult and pediatric victims. Equipment on the paramedic
engine and ambulances includes 12-lead cardiac monitor/defibrillators,
end-tidal CO2 and oxygen saturation monitors, glucometers, and
endotracheal intubation, resuscitation equipment and 20 different
medications for treatment and resuscitation.

The Fire District operates a single 2010 Pierce wildland fire tender.
This unit carries 2,000 US gallons (7,600 l) of water to supply to
engines during structure and wildland fires.

Additionally the department has a single type 3 fire engine or brush
engine which is designed and operated for wildland fire response. It
carries 500 US gallons (1,900 l) of water with Class A foam capability,
a wide assortment of fireline tools, and BLS (basic life support)
equipment including AED (Automated External Defibrillator).

References
==========
