**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boy%20Genius%20Report\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Boy Genius Report
=================

-   *Boy Genius Report (also referred to as BGR) is a
    technology-influenced website that covers topics ranging from
    consumer gadgets, to entertainment, gaming, and science.*

-   *On April 27, 2010, BGR was acquired by Penske Media Corporation.*

Boy Genius Report (also referred to as BGR) is a technology-influenced
website that covers topics ranging from consumer gadgets, to
entertainment, gaming, and science. Founded in October 2006 by anonymous
web personality Boy Genius (also referred to as BG/BGR), the site was
previously based on offering the public an early look at upcoming mobile
phones and devices before anyone else. On April 27, 2010, BGR was
acquired by Penske Media Corporation.

Reception
=========

-   *Examples of BGR's ability to be the first to report news about a
    gadget include the first pictures of the Android 2.0 mobile
    operating system in 2009 and the first reported picture of the
    Amazon Kindle 2 in 2008.*

-   *As of August 2017 BGR reaches over 11 million unique visitors a
    month.*

-   *BGR has been mentioned in many major news sources such as the Wall
    Street Journal blog Digits, ABC News, Reuters, The Huffington Post,
    and CNBC.*

BGR has been mentioned in many major news sources such as the Wall
Street Journal blog Digits, ABC News, Reuters, The Huffington Post, and
CNBC. Examples of BGR's ability to be the first to report news about a
gadget include the first pictures of the Android 2.0 mobile operating
system in 2009 and the first reported picture of the Amazon Kindle 2 in
2008.

As of August 2017 BGR reaches over 11 million unique visitors a month.
BGR has been criticized for having a very pro-Apple bias, and making
unreliably sourced rumors about Samsung Galaxy phones and Google branded
Pixel phones that are usually negative, and often consist of expecting
Samsung to copy Apple and their marketing.

Boy Genius
==========

-   *While running BGR, Boy Genius kept his identity concealed.*

-   *Geller chose to remain anonymous at first due to the marketing
    opportunities that being anonymous afforded him and his site;
    however when BGR joined Penske Media Corporation, Geller decided it
    was best for both him and his site that he reveal himself as the
    site's founder and Editor in Chief.*

While running BGR, Boy Genius kept his identity concealed. On April 27,
2010, Boy Genius revealed himself as Jonathan Geller, a 23-year-old
Greenwich (Greenwich, CT, U.S.A.) High School dropout who never attended
college. Geller chose to remain anonymous at first due to the marketing
opportunities that being anonymous afforded him and his site; however
when BGR joined Penske Media Corporation, Geller decided it was best for
both him and his site that he reveal himself as the site's founder and
Editor in Chief.

See also
========

-   *CNET*

-   *Engadget*

-   *TechCrunch*

-   *Gizmodo*

-   *The Verge*

CNET

Engadget

Gizmodo

TechCrunch

The Verge

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *BGR India*

Official website

BGR India
