**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brown%20v.%20Board%20of%20Education\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Brown v. Board of Education
===========================

-   *Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), was a
    landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled
    that American state laws establishing racial segregation in public
    schools are unconstitutional, even if the segregated schools are
    otherwise equal in quality.*

-   *The Court's decision in Brown partially overruled Plessy v.
    Ferguson by declaring that the "separate but equal" notion was
    unconstitutional for American public schools and educational
    facilities.*

Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483 (1954), was a
landmark decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in which the Court ruled
that American state laws establishing racial segregation in public
schools are unconstitutional, even if the segregated schools are
otherwise equal in quality. Handed down on May 17, 1954, the Court's
unanimous (9–0) decision stated that "separate educational facilities
are inherently unequal," and therefore violate the Equal Protection
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. However,
the decision's 14 pages did not spell out any sort of method for ending
racial segregation in schools, and the Court's second decision in Brown
II (349 U.S. 294 (1955)) only ordered states to desegregate "with all
deliberate speed".

The case originated with a lawsuit filed by the Brown family, a family
of black Americans in Topeka, Kansas, after their local public school
district refused to enroll their daughter in the school closest to their
home, instead requiring her to ride a bus to a blacks-only school
further away. A number of other black families joined the lawsuit, and
the Supreme Court later combined their case with several other similar
lawsuits from other areas of the United States. At trial, the district
court ruled in favor of the school board based on the Supreme Court's
precedent in the 1896 case Plessy v. Ferguson, in which the Court had
ruled that racial segregation was not in itself a violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause if the facilities in
question were otherwise equal, a doctrine that had come to be known as
"separate but equal". The Browns, represented by NAACP chief counsel
Thurgood Marshall, appealed to the Supreme Court, which agreed to hear
the case.

The Court's decision in Brown partially overruled Plessy v. Ferguson by
declaring that the "separate but equal" notion was unconstitutional for
American public schools and educational facilities. It paved the way for
integration and was a major victory of the Civil Rights Movement, and a
model for many future impact litigation cases. In the American South,
especially the "Deep South", where racial segregation was deeply
entrenched, the reaction to Brown among most white people was "noisy and
stubborn". Many Southern governmental and political leaders embraced a
plan known as "Massive Resistance", created by Virginia Senator Harry F.
Byrd, in order to frustrate attempts to force them to de-segregate their
school systems. Four years later, in the case of Cooper v. Aaron, the
Court reaffirmed its ruling in Brown, and explicitly stated that state
officials and legislators had no power to nullify its ruling.

Background
==========

-   *For much of the sixty years preceding the Brown case, race
    relations in the United States had been dominated by racial
    segregation.*

-   *This policy had been endorsed in 1896 by the United States Supreme
    Court case of Plessy v. Ferguson, which held that as long as the
    separate facilities for the separate races were equal, segregation
    did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment ("no State shall ... deny
    to any person ... the equal protection of the laws").*

For much of the sixty years preceding the Brown case, race relations in
the United States had been dominated by racial segregation. This policy
had been endorsed in 1896 by the United States Supreme Court case of
Plessy v. Ferguson, which held that as long as the separate facilities
for the separate races were equal, segregation did not violate the
Fourteenth Amendment ("no State shall ... deny to any person ... the
equal protection of the laws").

The plaintiffs in Brown asserted that this system of racial separation,
while masquerading as providing separate but equal treatment of both
white and black Americans, instead perpetuated inferior accommodations,
services, and treatment for black Americans. Racial segregation in
education varied widely from the 17 states that required racial
segregation to the 16 in which it was prohibited. Brown was influenced
by UNESCO's 1950 Statement, signed by a wide variety of internationally
renowned scholars, titled The Race Question. This declaration denounced
previous attempts at scientifically justifying racism as well as morally
condemning racism. Another work that the Supreme Court cited was Gunnar
Myrdal's An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy
(1944). Myrdal had been a signatory of the UNESCO declaration.

The United States and the Soviet Union were both at the height of the
Cold War during this time, and U.S. officials, including Supreme Court
Justices, were highly aware of the harm that segregation and racism
played on America's international image. When Justice William O. Douglas
traveled to India in 1950, the first question he was asked was, "Why
does America tolerate the lynching of Negroes?" Douglas later wrote that
he had learned from his travels that "the attitude of the United States
toward its colored minorities is a powerful factor in our relations with
India." Chief Justice Earl Warren, nominated to the Supreme Court by
President Eisenhower, echoed Douglas's concerns in a 1954 speech to the
American Bar Association, proclaiming that "Our American system like all
others is on trial both at home and abroad, ... the extent to which we
maintain the spirit of our constitution with its Bill of Rights, will in
the long run do more to make it both secure and the object of adulation
than the number of hydrogen bombs we stockpile."

Case
====

Filing and arguments
====================

-   *The case "Oliver Brown et al.*

-   *In 1951, a class action suit was filed against the Board of
    Education of the City of Topeka, Kansas in the United States
    District Court for the District of Kansas.*

-   *v. The Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas" was named after Oliver
    Brown as a legal strategy to have a man at the head of the roster.*

In 1951, a class action suit was filed against the Board of Education of
the City of Topeka, Kansas in the United States District Court for the
District of Kansas. The plaintiffs were thirteen Topeka parents on
behalf of their 20 children.

The suit called for the school district to reverse its policy of racial
segregation. The Topeka Board of Education operated separate elementary
schools due to a 1879 Kansas law, which permitted (but did not require)
districts to maintain separate elementary school facilities for black
and white students in 12 communities with populations over 15,000. The
plaintiffs had been recruited by the leadership of the Topeka NAACP.
Notable among the Topeka NAACP leaders were the chairman McKinley
Burnett; Charles Scott, one of three serving as legal counsel for the
chapter; and Lucinda Todd.

The named plaintiff, Oliver Brown, was a parent, a welder in the shops
of the Santa Fe Railroad, an assistant pastor at his local church, and
an African American. He was convinced to join the lawsuit by Scott, a
childhood friend. Brown's daughter Linda Carol Brown, a third grader,
had to walk six blocks to her school bus stop to ride to Monroe
Elementary, her segregated black school one mile (1.6 km) away, while
Sumner Elementary, a white school, was seven blocks from her house.

As directed by the NAACP leadership, the parents each attempted to
enroll their children in the closest neighborhood school in the fall of
1951. They were each refused enrollment and directed to the segregated
schools.

The case "Oliver Brown et al. v. The Board of Education of Topeka,
Kansas" was named after Oliver Brown as a legal strategy to have a man
at the head of the roster. The lawyers, and the National Chapter of the
NAACP, also felt that having Mr. Brown at the head of the roster would
be better received by the U.S. Supreme Court Justices. The 13 plaintiffs
were: Oliver Brown, Darlene Brown, Lena Carper, Sadie Emmanuel,
Marguerite Emerson, Shirley Fleming, Zelma Henderson, Shirley Hodison,
Maude Lawton, Alma Lewis, Iona Richardson, and Lucinda Todd. The last
surviving plaintiff, Zelma Henderson, died in Topeka, on May 20, 2008,
at age 88.

The District Court ruled in favor of the Board of Education, citing the
U.S. Supreme Court precedent set in Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537
(1896), which had upheld a state law requiring "separate but equal"
segregated facilities for blacks and whites in railway cars. The
three-judge District Court panel found that segregation in public
education has a detrimental effect on negro children, but denied relief
on the ground that the negro and white schools in Topeka were
substantially equal with respect to buildings, transportation,
curricula, and educational qualifications of teachers.

Supreme Court review
====================

-   *The case of Brown v. Board of Education as heard before the Supreme
    Court combined five cases: Brown itself, Briggs v. Elliott (filed in
    South Carolina), Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward
    County (filed in Virginia), Gebhart v. Belton (filed in Delaware),
    and Bolling v. Sharpe (filed in Washington, D.C.).*

The case of Brown v. Board of Education as heard before the Supreme
Court combined five cases: Brown itself, Briggs v. Elliott (filed in
South Carolina), Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County
(filed in Virginia), Gebhart v. Belton (filed in Delaware), and Bolling
v. Sharpe (filed in Washington, D.C.).

All were NAACP-sponsored cases. The Davis case, the only case of the
five originating from a student protest, began when 16-year-old Barbara
Rose Johns organized and led a 450-student walkout of Moton High School.
The Gebhart case was the only one where a trial court, affirmed by the
Delaware Supreme Court, found that discrimination was unlawful; in all
the other cases the plaintiffs had lost as the original courts had found
discrimination to be lawful.

The Kansas case was unique among the group in that there was no
contention of gross inferiority of the segregated schools' physical
plant, curriculum, or staff. The district court found substantial
equality as to all such factors. The lower court, in its opinion, noted
that, in Topeka, "the physical facilities, the curricula, courses of
study, qualification and quality of teachers, as well as other
educational facilities in the two sets of schools \[were\] comparable."
The lower court observed that "colored children in many instances are
required to travel much greater distances than they would be required to
travel could they attend a white school" but also noted that the school
district "transports colored children to and from school free of charge"
and that "no such service \[was\] provided to white children."

In the Delaware case the district court judge in Gebhart ordered that
the black students be admitted to the white high school due to the
substantial harm of segregation and the differences that made the
separate schools unequal.

The NAACP's chief counsel, Thurgood Marshall—who was later appointed to
the U.S. Supreme Court in 1967—argued the case before the Supreme Court
for the plaintiffs. Assistant attorney general Paul Wilson—later
distinguished emeritus professor of law at the University of
Kansas—conducted the state's ambivalent defense in his first appellate
argument.

In December 1952, the Justice Department filed a friend of the court
brief in the case. The brief was unusual in its heavy emphasis on
foreign-policy considerations of the Truman administration in a case
ostensibly about domestic issues. Of the seven pages covering "the
interest of the United States," five focused on the way school
segregation hurt the United States in the Cold War competition for the
friendship and allegiance of non-white peoples in countries then gaining
independence from colonial rule. Attorney General James P. McGranery
noted that

The brief also quoted a letter by Secretary of State Dean Acheson
lamenting that

British barrister and parliamentarian Anthony Lester has written that
"Although the Court's opinion in Brown made no reference to these
considerations of foreign policy, there is no doubt that they
significantly influenced the decision."

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.7657655293088363in"}\
*The members of the U.S. Supreme Court that on May 17, 1954, ruled
unanimously that racial segregation in public schools is
unconstitutional.*

Consensus building
==================

-   *Warren had supported the integration of Mexican-American students
    in California school systems following Mendez v. Westminster.*

-   *The Court reargued the case at the behest of Associate Justice
    Felix Frankfurter, who used reargument as a stalling tactic, to
    allow the Court to gather a consensus around a Brown opinion that
    would outlaw segregation.*

In spring 1953, the Court heard the case but was unable to decide the
issue and asked to rehear the case in fall 1953, with special attention
to whether the Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause prohibited
the operation of separate public schools for whites and blacks.

The Court reargued the case at the behest of Associate Justice Felix
Frankfurter, who used reargument as a stalling tactic, to allow the
Court to gather a consensus around a Brown opinion that would outlaw
segregation. The justices in support of desegregation spent much effort
convincing those who initially intended to dissent to join a unanimous
opinion. Although the legal effect would be same for a majority rather
than unanimous decision, it was felt that dissent could be used by
segregation supporters as a legitimizing counter-argument.

Conference notes and draft decisions illustrate the division of opinions
before the decision was issued. Justices Douglas, Black, Burton, and
Minton were predisposed to overturn Plessy. Fred M. Vinson noted that
Congress had not issued desegregation legislation; Stanley F. Reed
discussed incomplete cultural assimilation and states' rights and was
inclined to the view that segregation worked to the benefit of the
African-American community; Tom C. Clark wrote that "we had led the
states on to think segregation is OK and we should let them work it
out." Felix Frankfurter and Robert H. Jackson disapproved of
segregation, but were also opposed to judicial activism and expressed
concerns about the proposed decision's enforceability. Chief Justice
Vinson had been a key stumbling block. After Vinson died in September
1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed Earl Warren as Chief
Justice. Warren had supported the integration of Mexican-American
students in California school systems following Mendez v. Westminster.
However, Eisenhower invited Earl Warren to a White House dinner, where
the president told him: "These \[southern whites\] are not bad people.
All they are concerned about is to see that their sweet little girls are
not required to sit in school alongside some big overgrown Negroes."
Nevertheless, the Justice Department sided with the African American
plaintiffs.

While all but one justice personally rejected segregation, the judicial
restraint faction questioned whether the Constitution gave the Court the
power to order its end. The activist faction believed the Fourteenth
Amendment did give the necessary authority and were pushing to go ahead.
Warren, who held only a recess appointment, held his tongue until the
Senate confirmed his appointment.

Warren convened a meeting of the justices, and presented to them the
simple argument that the only reason to sustain segregation was an
honest belief in the inferiority of Negroes. Warren further submitted
that the Court must overrule Plessy to maintain its legitimacy as an
institution of liberty, and it must do so unanimously to avoid massive
Southern resistance. He began to build a unanimous opinion. Although
most justices were immediately convinced, Warren spent some time after
this famous speech convincing everyone to sign onto the opinion. Justice
Jackson dropped his concurrence and Reed finally decided to drop his
dissent. The final decision was unanimous. Warren drafted the basic
opinion and kept circulating and revising it until he had an opinion
endorsed by all the members of the Court. Reed was the last holdout and
reportedly cried during the reading of the opinion.

Decision
========

-   *In answer, the Court ruled that it did.*

-   *This became the case known as Brown II, described below.*

-   *On May 17, 1954, the Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor
    of the Brown family and the other plaintiffs.*

-   *This prevented the Court from finding a violation of the Equal
    Protection Clause in "measurable inequalities" between all white and
    black schools, and instead required it to look to the effects of
    segregation itself.*

On May 17, 1954, the Court issued a unanimous 9–0 decision in favor of
the Brown family and the other plaintiffs. The decision consists of a
single opinion written by Chief Justice Earl Warren, which all the
justices joined. The Court began by noting that it had attempted to find
an answer to the question of whether the Fourteenth Amendment was meant
to abolish segregation in public education by hearing a second round of
oral arguments from the parties' lawyers specifically on the historical
sources relating to its drafting and ratification, but to no avail.

The Court also stated that using historical information on the original
scope of the Fourteenth Amendment's application to public education was
difficult because of intervening societal and governmental changes. It
noted that in 1868, when the Amendment was adopted, public schools were
uncommon in the American South. White children whose families could
afford schooling usually attended private schools, and the education of
black children was "almost nonexistent", to the point that in some
Southern states any education of black people had actually been
forbidden by law. The Court contrasted this with the situation in 1954:
"Today, education is perhaps the most important function of our local
and state governments." It concluded that, in making its ruling, the
Court would have to "consider public education in light of its full
development and its present place in American life throughout the
Nation."

The Court did not address the issues regarding the many instances in
which the segregated educational facilities for black children in the
cases were inferior in quality to those for white children, probably
because some of the school districts involved had made improvements to
their black schools to "equalize" them with the quality of the white
schools. This prevented the Court from finding a violation of the Equal
Protection Clause in "measurable inequalities" between all white and
black schools, and instead required it to look to the effects of
segregation itself. Thus, the Court framed the case around the more
general question of whether the principle of "separate but equal" was
constitutional when applied to public education:

In answer, the Court ruled that it did. It held that state-mandated
segregation, even if implemented in schools of otherwise equal quality,
is inherently unequal: "To separate \[black children\] from others of
similar age and qualifications solely because of their race generates a
feeling of inferiority as to their status in the community that may
affect their hearts and minds in a way unlikely to ever be undone." The
Court supported this conclusion with citations—in a footnote, not the
main text of the opinion—to a number of psychology studies that
purported to show that segregating black children made them feel
inferior and interfered with their learning. These studies included
those of Kenneth and Mamie Clark, whose experiments in the 1940s had
suggested that black children from segregated environments preferred
white dolls over black dolls.

The Court then concluded its relatively short opinion by declaring that
segregated public education was inherently unequal, violated the Equal
Protection Clause, and therefore was unconstitutional:

The Court did not close with an order to implement the remedy of
integrating the schools of the various jurisdictions, but instead
requested the parties to re-appear before the Court the following Term
in order to hold arguments on the issue. This became the case known as
Brown II, described below.

Reaction and aftermath
======================

-   *Although many Americans cheered the Court's decision, most Southern
    whites decried it, and progress on integrating American schools
    moved slowly.*

-   *Many viewed Brown v. Board of Education as "a day of catastrophe —
    a Black Monday — a day something like Pearl Harbor".*

Although many Americans cheered the Court's decision, most Southern
whites decried it, and progress on integrating American schools moved
slowly. Many viewed Brown v. Board of Education as "a day of catastrophe
— a Black Monday — a day something like Pearl Harbor".

The American political historian Robert G. McCloskey wrote of the
South's anger with the decision and its slow effects:

In Virginia, Senator Harry F. Byrd organized the Massive Resistance
movement that included the closing of schools rather than desegregating
them.

Deep South
==========

-   *But Florida Governor LeRoy Collins, though joining in the protest
    against the court decision, refused to sign it, arguing that the
    attempt to overturn the ruling must be done by legal methods.*

-   *This became the infamous Stand in the Schoolhouse Door where
    Wallace personally backed his "segregation now, segregation
    tomorrow, segregation forever" policy that he had stated in his 1963
    inaugural address.*

Texas Attorney General John Ben Shepperd organized a campaign to
generate legal obstacles to implementation of desegregation.

In 1957, Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus called out his state's National
Guard to block black students' entry to Little Rock Central High School.
President Dwight Eisenhower responded by deploying elements of the 101st
Airborne Division from Fort Campbell, Kentucky, to Arkansas and by
federalizing Arkansas's National Guard.

Also in 1957, Florida's response was mixed. Its legislature passed an
Interposition Resolution denouncing the decision and declaring it null
and void. But Florida Governor LeRoy Collins, though joining in the
protest against the court decision, refused to sign it, arguing that the
attempt to overturn the ruling must be done by legal methods.

In Mississippi fear of violence prevented any plaintiff from bringing a
school desegregation suit for the next nine years. When Medgar Evers
sued to desegregate Jackson, Mississippi schools in 1963 White Citizens
Council member Byron De La Beckwith murdered him. Two subsequent trials
resulted in hung juries. Beckwith was not convicted of the murder until
1994.

In 1963, Alabama Gov. George Wallace personally blocked the door to
Foster Auditorium at the University of Alabama to prevent the enrollment
of two black students. This became the infamous Stand in the Schoolhouse
Door where Wallace personally backed his "segregation now, segregation
tomorrow, segregation forever" policy that he had stated in his 1963
inaugural address. He moved aside only when confronted by General Henry
Graham of the Alabama National Guard, who was ordered by President John
F. Kennedy to intervene.

Native American communities were also heavily impacted by segregation
laws with native children also being prohibited from attending white
institutions. Native American children considered light-complexioned
were allowed to ride school buses to previously all white schools, while
dark-skinned Native children from the same band were still barred from
riding the same buses. Tribal leaders, learned about Dr. King's
desegregation campaign in Birmingham, Alabama, contacted him for
assistance. King promptly responded to the tribal leaders and through
his intervention the problem was quickly resolved.

Upland South
============

-   *In North Carolina, there was often a strategy of nominally
    accepting Brown, but tacitly resisting it.*

-   *They appealed their dismissal in Naomi Brooks et al.,
    Appellants, v. School District of City of Moberly, Missouri, Etc.,
    et al.*

-   *On May 18, 1954 the Greensboro, North Carolina school board
    declared that it would abide by the Brown ruling.*

In North Carolina, there was often a strategy of nominally accepting
Brown, but tacitly resisting it. On May 18, 1954 the Greensboro, North
Carolina school board declared that it would abide by the Brown ruling.
This was the result of the initiative of D. E. Hudgins Jr., a former
Rhodes Scholar and prominent attorney, who chaired the school board.
This made Greensboro the first, and for years the only, city in the
South, to announce its intent to comply. However, others in the city
resisted integration, putting up legal obstacles\[how?\] to the actual
implementation of school desegregation for years afterward, and in 1969,
the federal government found the city was not in compliance with the
1964 Civil Rights Act. Transition to a fully integrated school system
did not begin until 1971, after numerous local lawsuits and both
nonviolent and violent demonstrations. Historians have noted the irony
that Greensboro, which had heralded itself as such a progressive city,
was one of the last holdouts for school desegregation.

In Moberly, Missouri, the schools were desegregated, as ordered.
However, after 1955, the African-American teachers from the local "negro
school" were not retained; this was ascribed to poor performance. They
appealed their dismissal in Naomi Brooks et al., Appellants, v. School
District of City of Moberly, Missouri, Etc., et al.; but it was upheld,
and SCOTUS declined to hear a further appeal.

North
=====

-   *In Harlem, New York, for example, not a single new school had been
    built since the turn of the century, nor did a single nursery school
    exist, even as the Second Great Migration caused overcrowding of
    existing schools.*

-   *Northern officials were in denial of the segregation, but Brown
    helped stimulate activism among African-American parents like Mae
    Mallory who, with support of the NAACP, initiated a successful
    lawsuit against the city and State of New York on Brown's
    principles.*

Many Northern cities also had de facto segregation policies, which
resulted in a vast gulf in educational resources between black and white
communities. In Harlem, New York, for example, not a single new school
had been built since the turn of the century, nor did a single nursery
school exist, even as the Second Great Migration caused overcrowding of
existing schools. Existing schools tended to be dilapidated and staffed
with inexperienced teachers. Northern officials were in denial of the
segregation, but Brown helped stimulate activism among African-American
parents like Mae Mallory who, with support of the NAACP, initiated a
successful lawsuit against the city and State of New York on Brown's
principles. Mallory and thousands of other parents bolstered the
pressure of the lawsuit with a school boycott in 1959. During the
boycott, some of the first freedom schools of the period were
established. The city responded to the campaign by permitting more open
transfers to high-quality, historically-white schools. (New York's
African-American community, and Northern desegregation activists
generally, now found themselves contending with the problem of white
flight, however.)

Topeka
======

-   *In deciding Brown v. Board of Education, the Supreme Court rejected
    the ideas of scientific racists about the need for segregation,
    especially in schools.*

-   *The Board of Education of Topeka began to end segregation in the
    Topeka elementary schools in August 1953, integrating two attendance
    districts.*

-   *The intellectual roots of Plessy v. Ferguson, the landmark United
    States Supreme Court decision upholding the constitutionality of
    racial segregation in 1896 under the doctrine of "separate but
    equal" were, in part, tied to the scientific racism of the era.*

The Topeka junior high schools had been integrated since 1941. Topeka
High School was integrated from its inception in 1871 and its sports
teams from 1949 on. The Kansas law permitting segregated schools allowed
them only "below the high school level".

Soon after the district court decision, election outcomes and the
political climate in Topeka changed. The Board of Education of Topeka
began to end segregation in the Topeka elementary schools in August
1953, integrating two attendance districts. All the Topeka elementary
schools were changed to neighborhood attendance centers in January 1956,
although existing students were allowed to continue attending their
prior assigned schools at their option. Plaintiff Zelma Henderson, in a
2004 interview, recalled that no demonstrations or tumult accompanied
desegregation in Topeka's schools:

The Topeka Public Schools administration building is named in honor of
McKinley Burnett, NAACP chapter president who organized the
case.\[citation needed\]

Monroe Elementary was designated a U.S. National Historic Site unit of
the National Park Service on October 26, 1992.

The intellectual roots of Plessy v. Ferguson, the landmark United States
Supreme Court decision upholding the constitutionality of racial
segregation in 1896 under the doctrine of "separate but equal" were, in
part, tied to the scientific racism of the era. However, the popular
support for the decision was more likely a result of the racist beliefs
held by many whites at the time. In deciding Brown v. Board of
Education, the Supreme Court rejected the ideas of scientific racists
about the need for segregation, especially in schools. The Court
buttressed its holding by citing (in footnote 11) social science
research about the harms to black children caused by segregated schools.

Both scholarly and popular ideas of hereditarianism played an important
role in the attack and backlash that followed the Brown decision. The
Mankind Quarterly was founded in 1960, in part in response to the Brown
decision.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.044117454068242in"}\
*U.S. circuit judges Robert A. Katzmann, Damon J. Keith, and Sonia
Sotomayor at a 2004 exhibit on the Fourteenth Amendment, Thurgood
Marshall, and Brown v. Board of Education*

Legal criticism and praise
==========================

-   *In May 2004, the fiftieth anniversary of the ruling, President
    George W. Bush spoke at the opening of the Brown v. Board of
    Education National Historic Site, calling Brown "a decision that
    changed America for the better, and forever."*

-   *Notably, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, himself an African
    American, wrote in Missouri v. Jenkins (1995) that at the very
    least, Brown I has been misunderstood by the courts.*

William Rehnquist wrote a memo titled "A Random Thought on the
Segregation Cases" when he was a law clerk for Justice Robert H. Jackson
in 1952, during early deliberations that led to the Brown v. Board of
Education decision. In his memo, Rehnquist argued: "I realize that it is
an unpopular and unhumanitarian position, for which I have been
excoriated by 'liberal' colleagues but I think Plessy v. Ferguson was
right and should be reaffirmed." Rehnquist continued, "To the argument
. . . that a majority may not deprive a minority of its constitutional
right, the answer must be made that while this is sound in theory, in
the long run it is the majority who will determine what the
constitutional rights of the minorities are." Rehnquist also argued for
Plessy with other law clerks.

However, during his 1971 confirmation hearings, Rehnquist said, "I
believe that the memorandum was prepared by me as a statement of Justice
Jackson's tentative views for his own use." Justice Jackson had
initially planned to join a dissent in Brown. Later, at his 1986
hearings for the slot of Chief Justice, Rehnquist put further distance
between himself and the 1952 memo: "The bald statement that Plessy was
right and should be reaffirmed, was not an accurate reflection of my own
views at the time."\
In any event, while serving on the Supreme Court, Rehnquist made no
effort to reverse or undermine the Brown decision, and frequently relied
upon it as precedent.

Chief Justice Warren's reasoning was broadly criticized by contemporary
legal academics with Judge Learned Hand decrying that the Supreme Court
had "assumed the role of a third legislative chamber" and Herbert
Wechsler finding Brown impossible to justify based on neutral
principles.

Some aspects of the Brown decision are still debated. Notably, Supreme
Court Justice Clarence Thomas, himself an African American, wrote in
Missouri v. Jenkins (1995) that at the very least, Brown I has been
misunderstood by the courts.

Some Constitutional originalists, notably Raoul Berger in his
influential 1977 book "Government by Judiciary," make the case that
Brown cannot be defended by reference to the original understanding of
the 14th Amendment. They support this reading of the 14th amendment by
noting that the Civil Rights Act of 1875 did not ban segregated schools
and that the same Congress that passed the 14th Amendment also voted to
segregate schools in the District of Columbia. Other originalists,
including Michael W. McConnell, a federal judge on the United States
Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit, in his article "Originalism and
the Desegregation Decisions," argue that the Radical Reconstructionists
who spearheaded the 14th Amendment were in favor of desegregated
southern schools. Evidence supporting this interpretation of the 14th
amendment has come from archived Congressional records showing that
proposals for federal legislation which would enforce school integration
were debated in Congress a few years following the amendment's
ratification. In response to Michael McConnell's research, Raoul Berger
argued that the Congressmen and Senators who were advocating in favor of
school desegregation in the 1870s were trying to rewrite the 14th
Amendment (in order to make the 14th Amendment fit their political
agenda) and that the actual understanding of the 14th Amendment from
1866 to 1868 (which is when the 14th Amendment was actually passed and
ratified) does, in fact, permit U.S. states to have segregated schools.

The case also has attracted some criticism from more liberal authors,
including some who say that Chief Justice Warren's reliance on
psychological criteria to find a harm against segregated blacks was
unnecessary. For example, Drew S. Days has written: "we have developed
criteria for evaluating the constitutionality of racial classifications
that do not depend upon findings of psychic harm or social science
evidence. They are based rather on the principle that 'distinctions
between citizens solely because of their ancestry are by their very
nature odious to a free people whose institutions are founded upon the
doctrine of equality,' Hirabayashi v. United States, 320 U.S. 81
(1943). . . ."

In his book The Tempting of America (page 82), Robert Bork endorsed the
Brown decision as follows:

In June 1987, Philip Elman, a civil rights attorney who served as an
associate in the Solicitor General's office during Harry Truman's term,
claimed he and Associate Justice Felix Frankfurter were mostly
responsible for the Supreme Court's decision, and stated that the
NAACP's arguments did not present strong evidence. Elman has been
criticized for offering a self-aggrandizing history of the case,
omitting important facts, and denigrating the work of civil rights
attorneys who had laid the groundwork for the decision over many
decades. However, Frankfurter was also known for being one of court's
most outspoken advocates of the judicial restraint philosophy of basing
court rulings on existing law rather than personal or political
considerations. Public officials in the United States today are nearly
unanimous in lauding the ruling. In May 2004, the fiftieth anniversary
of the ruling, President George W. Bush spoke at the opening of the
Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site, calling Brown "a
decision that changed America for the better, and forever." Most
Senators and Representatives issued press releases hailing the ruling.

In an article in Townhall, Thomas Sowell argued that when Chief Justice
Earl Warren declared in the landmark 1954 case of Brown v. Board of
Education that racially separate schools were "inherently unequal,"
Dunbar High School was a living refutation of that assumption. And it
was within walking distance of the Supreme Court."

Brown II
========

-   *But the public schools reopened after the Supreme Court overturned
    "Brown II" in Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward
    County, declaring that "...the time for mere 'deliberate speed' has
    run out," and that the county must provide a public school system
    for all children regardless of race.*

-   *In 1955, the Supreme Court considered arguments by the schools
    requesting relief concerning the task of desegregation.*

In 1955, the Supreme Court considered arguments by the schools
requesting relief concerning the task of desegregation. In their
decision, which became known as "Brown II" the court delegated the task
of carrying out school desegregation to district courts with orders that
desegregation occur "with all deliberate speed," a phrase traceable to
Francis Thompson's poem, "The Hound of Heaven".

Supporters of the earlier decision were displeased with this decision.
The language "all deliberate speed" was seen by critics as too ambiguous
to ensure reasonable haste for compliance with the court's instruction.
Many Southern states and school districts interpreted "Brown II" as
legal justification for resisting, delaying, and avoiding significant
integration for years—and in some cases for a decade or more—using such
tactics as closing down school systems, using state money to finance
segregated "private" schools, and "token" integration where a few
carefully selected black children were admitted to former white-only
schools but the vast majority remained in underfunded, unequal black
schools.

For example, based on "Brown II," the U.S. District Court ruled that
Prince Edward County, Virginia did not have to desegregate immediately.
When faced with a court order to finally begin desegregation in 1959 the
county board of supervisors stopped appropriating money for public
schools, which remained closed for five years, from 1959 to 1964.

White students in the county were given assistance to attend white-only
"private academies" that were taught by teachers formerly employed by
the public school system, while black students had no education at all
unless they moved out of the county. But the public schools reopened
after the Supreme Court overturned "Brown II" in Griffin v. County
School Board of Prince Edward County, declaring that "...the time for
mere 'deliberate speed' has run out," and that the county must provide a
public school system for all children regardless of race.

Brown III
=========

-   *The district court reopened the Brown case after a 25-year hiatus,
    but denied the plaintiffs' request finding the schools "unitary".*

-   *One of the new magnet schools is named after the Scott family
    attorneys for their role in the Brown case and civil rights.*

-   *In 1978, Topeka attorneys Richard Jones, Joseph Johnson and Charles
    Scott, Jr. (son of the original Brown team member), with assistance
    from the American Civil Liberties Union, persuaded Linda Brown
    Smith—who now had her own children in Topeka schools—to be a
    plaintiff in reopening Brown.*

In 1978, Topeka attorneys Richard Jones, Joseph Johnson and Charles
Scott, Jr. (son of the original Brown team member), with assistance from
the American Civil Liberties Union, persuaded Linda Brown Smith—who now
had her own children in Topeka schools—to be a plaintiff in reopening
Brown. They were concerned that the Topeka Public Schools' policy of
"open enrollment" had led to and would lead to further segregation. They
also believed that with a choice of open enrollment, white parents would
shift their children to "preferred" schools that would create both
predominantly African American and predominantly European American
schools within the district. The district court reopened the Brown case
after a 25-year hiatus, but denied the plaintiffs' request finding the
schools "unitary". In 1989, a three-judge panel of the Tenth Circuit on
2–1 vote found that the vestiges of segregation remained with respect to
student and staff assignment. In 1993, the Supreme Court denied the
appellant School District's request for certiorari and returned the case
to District Court Judge Richard Rodgers for implementation of the Tenth
Circuit's mandate.

After a 1994 plan was approved and a bond issue passed, additional
elementary magnet schools were opened and district attendance plans
redrawn, which resulted in the Topeka schools meeting court standards of
racial balance by 1998. Unified status was eventually granted to Topeka
Unified School District No. 501 on July 27, 1999. One of the new magnet
schools is named after the Scott family attorneys for their role in the
Brown case and civil rights.

Related cases
=============

Other comments
==============

-   *Linda Brown Thompson later recalled the experience of being refused
    enrollment:*

-   *A PBS film called "Simple Justice" retells the story of the Brown
    vs. Board of Education case, beginning with the work of the NAACP's
    Legal Defense Fund's efforts to combat 'separate but equal' in
    graduate school education and culminating in the historical 1954
    decision.*

A PBS film called "Simple Justice" retells the story of the Brown vs.
Board of Education case, beginning with the work of the NAACP's Legal
Defense Fund's efforts to combat 'separate but equal' in graduate school
education and culminating in the historical 1954 decision.

Linda Brown Thompson later recalled the experience of being refused
enrollment:

Linda Brown died on March 25, 2018 at the age of 76.

See also
========

-   *Timeline of the civil rights movement*

-   *Civil rights movement (1896–1954)*

-   *Ruby Bridges, the first black child to attend an all-white
    elementary school in the South*

Civil rights movement (1896–1954)

Little Rock Nine

Rubey Mosley Hulen, federal judge who made a similar ruling in an
earlier case

Timeline of the civil rights movement

Ruby Bridges, the first black child to attend an all-white elementary
school in the South

References
==========

Footnotes
=========

Citations
=========

Works cited
===========

Further reading
===============

-   *Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of Education and
    Black America's Struggle for Equality.*

-   *""Our decision does not end but begins the struggle over
    segregation" Brown v. Board of Education, 1954: Justice Robert H.
    Jackson".*

-   *All Deliberate Speed: Reflections on the First Half Century of
    Brown v. Board of Education.*

Keppel, Ben. Brown v. Board and the Transformation of American Culture
(LSU Press, 2016). xiv, 225 pp.

Kluger, Richard (1975). Simple Justice: The History of Brown v. Board of
Education and Black America's Struggle for Equality. New York: Knopf.
ISBN 9780394472898.

Ogletree, Charles J., Jr. (2004). All Deliberate Speed: Reflections on
the First Half Century of Brown v. Board of Education. New York: W.W.
Norton. ISBN 9780393058970.

Patterson, James T., and William W. Freehling. Brown v. Board of
Education: A civil rights milestone and its troubled legacy (Oxford
University Press, 2001).

Tushnet, Mark V. (2008). ""Our decision does not end but begins the
struggle over segregation" Brown v. Board of Education, 1954: Justice
Robert H. Jackson". In Tushnet, Mark V. (ed.). I dissent: Great Opposing
Opinions in Landmark Supreme Court Cases. Boston: Beacon Press.
pp. 133–150. ISBN 9780807000366. Preview.

External links
==============

-   *Case Brief for Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka at Lawnix.com*

-   *Brown v. Board of Education, Civil Rights Digital Library.*

-   *Works related to Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (347
    U.S. 483) at Wikisource*

-   *"Supreme Court Landmark Case Brown v. Board of Education" from
    C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions*

Works related to Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (347 U.S. 483) at
Wikisource

Text of Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) is available
from:  Cornell  CourtListener  Google Scholar  Justia  Library of
Congress  Oyez (oral argument audio) 

Case Brief for Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka at Lawnix.com

Case information and transcripts on The Curiae Project

Brown v. Board of Education National Historic Site (US Park Service)

A copy of Florida's 1957 Interposition Resolution in Response to the
Brown decision, with Gov. Collin's handwritten rejection of it. Made
available for public use by the State Archives of Florida.

U.S. District Court of Kansas: Records of Brown v. Board of Education,
Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library

Online documents relating to Brown vs. Board of Education, Dwight D.
Eisenhower Presidential Library

Documents from the district court, including the original complaint and
trial transcript, at the Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse

60th Anniversary of Brown v. Board of Education curated by Michigan
State University's Diversity of Excellence through Artistic Expression

Brown v. Board of Education, Civil Rights Digital Library.

"Supreme Court Landmark Case Brown v. Board of Education" from C-SPAN's
Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court Decisions
