**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burlington%20College\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Burlington College
==================

-   *Burlington College was a private, nonprofit liberal arts college
    located in Burlington, Vermont, that offered associate, bachelor's,
    and master's degrees, as well as several professional certificates.*

-   *The college announced on May 16, 2016, that it would cease
    operations on May 27.*

Burlington College was a private, nonprofit liberal arts college located
in Burlington, Vermont, that offered associate, bachelor's, and master's
degrees, as well as several professional certificates. Although
regionally accredited by the New England Association of Schools and
Colleges, the college was placed on probation in July 2014 for failing
to meet the accreditor's standards regarding financial resources. The
college announced on May 16, 2016, that it would cease operations on May
27.

History
=======

-   *In 2007, the college had 204 students at its main campus in
    buildings in downtown Burlington.*

-   *In May 2016, the college board of trustees decided to close the
    school.*

-   *In 2015, the college resold 27.5 acres of the land it had
    purchased.*

-   *Burlington College started in 1972 as the Vermont Institute of
    Community Involvement.*

Burlington College started in 1972 as the Vermont Institute of Community
Involvement. A handful of students met in the living room of founder Dr.
Steward LaCasce. It originally served adult learners and veterans.

In 2007, the college had 204 students at its main campus in buildings in
downtown Burlington. Since most were part-time, this worked out to 130
"full-time equivalents". An additional 30 students studied off-campus.

In 2010, Jane O’Meara Sanders oversaw the purchase of 33 acres of
property to be used for college expansion, with the resulting
significant debt to be covered by already pledged donations and tuition
from planned increased enrollment over five years. Sanders departed
shortly after, with Christine Plunkett assuming the position of
president.

In 2014, the regional accreditor of the college placed it on probation
because of its financial condition, and votes of no confidence were
given to Plunkett from organizations representing students, faculty, and
staff. She resigned shortly thereafter. In 2015, the college resold 27.5
acres of the land it had purchased. In May 2016, the college board of
trustees decided to close the school. According to David A. Graham,
writing in The Atlantic, some of the school's financial difficulties
dated back to 2010 when the board of directors and Sanders purchased the
property in 2010. The original \$11 million of debt had been worked down
to about \$2 million, but because of remaining debt and "insufficient
financial resources", the school's bank declined to renew their \$1
million line of credit, and the school was facing the loss of their
accreditation. Local Burlington developer Eric Farrell will be
purchasing the campus from the bank and plans to develop a park and
housing.

Presidents
==========

-   *2014: Michael Smith (interim)*

1972–1994: J. Steward LaCasce

1994–2002: Daniel Casey

2002–2003: Mary Clancy

2004–2011: Jane O’Meara Sanders

2012–2014: Christine Plunkett

2014: Michael Smith (interim)

2014–2016: Carol A. Moore

Campus
======

-   *In 2010, Burlington College announced its intention to purchase the
    property of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Burlington for use as its
    main campus.*

-   *At the press conference announcing the closure, the school stated
    that the developer would purchase the college's North Avenue campus
    from the bank.*

In 2010, Burlington College announced its intention to purchase the
property of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Burlington for use as its main
campus. The college sold its former campus to the Committee for
Temporary Shelter, a welfare agency, and purchased 32.4 acres (13.1 ha)
of waterfront diocese property in early 2011. In 2015, the college
arranged to sell a local developer a parcel of land, as well as the
former diocesan orphanage attached to the office and classroom building.
The developer, Farrell Real Estate, drafted a master plan to convert the
orphanage to student housing. The college retained the original diocese
building for classrooms, studios, art rooms, film and radio,
laboratories, etc., and the surrounding property. At the press
conference announcing the closure, the school stated that the developer
would purchase the college's North Avenue campus from the bank.

Academics
=========

-   *In connection with the undergraduate legal studies program,
    Burlington College held an articulation agreement with Vermont Law
    School which allowed Burlington College graduates to proceed into
    the juris doctor and joint juris doctor programs at Vermont Law
    School upon successful completion of their undergraduate studies.*

-   *Burlington College also offered an affiliation with the Vermont
    Woodworking School in Fairfax.*

-   *Burlington College offered a low-residency master of arts degree.*

Burlington College offered a span of undergraduate programs in the arts,
writing and literature, film studies, photography, fine arts, legal
studies, transpersonal psychology/psychology, human services, media
activism, and graphic design, and an individualized undergraduate and
graduate degree program. The college offered students study-abroad
options within Europe, and in 2008, Burlington College became one of the
very few universities in the United States to offer a study-abroad
program in Havana, Cuba in conjunction with the University of Havana.
Students had the ability to spend a semester at the university or take
one of several one-week trips offered throughout the academic year.
Burlington College joined several other universities in the United
States by offering students the option of a narrative evaluation in
addition to traditional transcripts.

In connection with the undergraduate legal studies program, Burlington
College held an articulation agreement with Vermont Law School which
allowed Burlington College graduates to proceed into the juris doctor
and joint juris doctor programs at Vermont Law School upon successful
completion of their undergraduate studies. Burlington College also
offered an affiliation with the Vermont Woodworking School in Fairfax.
The courses in woodworking and fine craftsmanship were offered for
credit to support both associate of arts and bachelor of fine arts
degree programs. In addition to woodworking skills, students took the
usual general education requirements of the college. The degree could be
taken on campus, at a distance, or in combination. Burlington College
offered a low-residency master of arts degree. The degree was
individualized and tailored to meet the academic needs and focus of
individual graduate students.

Rankings
========

-   *In October 2013, Newsweek named Burlington College as among the 10
    colleges in the United States to have the highest rate of
    participation in student internships in their study field.*

-   *In August 2011, The Daily Beast and Newsweek ranked Burlington
    College as the number-one school in the United States for
    free-spirited students.*

In August 2011, The Daily Beast and Newsweek ranked Burlington College
as the number-one school in the United States for free-spirited
students. In October 2013, Newsweek named Burlington College as among
the 10 colleges in the United States to have the highest rate of
participation in student internships in their study field.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Official website*

-   *Coordinates: 44°29′28″N 73°13′42″W﻿ / ﻿44.4912°N 73.2282°W﻿ /
    44.4912; -73.2282*

Official website

Coordinates: 44°29′28″N 73°13′42″W﻿ / ﻿44.4912°N 73.2282°W﻿ / 44.4912;
-73.2282
