**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Camilla\_Pasini\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Camilla Pasini
==============

-   *Among the many roles she portrayed are Violetta in Verdi's La
    traviata, Desdemona in Verdi's Otello, Norina in Donizetti's Don
    Pasquale, the title role in Puccini's Tosca, Margherita in Boito's
    Mefistofele, the title role in Umberto Giordano's Fedora, the title
    role in Alfredo Catalani's La Wally, the title role in Catalani's
    Loreley, Suzel in Pietro Mascagni's L'amico Fritz, Elsa in Wagner's
    Lohengrin, and the title role in Jules Massenet's Grisélidis.*

Camilla Pasini (6 November 1875 – 29 November 1935) was an Italian
operatic soprano. Her sister Lina Pasini-Vitale was a well known
Wagnerian soprano and her other sister, Enrica Pasini, had a short
career as an operatic mezzo-soprano. Pasini studied at the Accademia
Nazionale di Santa Cecilia in Rome and made her professional opera debut
in that city at the Teatro Quirino as Inez in Meyerbeer's L'Africaine.
She most notably originated the role of Musetta in the original 1896
production of Puccini's La bohème at the Teatro Regio in Turin. She also
sang that role at numerous other theaters including La Scala, the Teatro
Costanzi in Rome, and in Brescia, Genoa, Trieste, and Asti among others.
In 1904, Pasini traveled to South America where she performed on tour in
many countries and cities. In 1905, Pasini married a lawyer with the
surname of Muzi and promptly gave up her career for the next six years.
She returned to the stage in 1911 in the premiere of the opera La
Vigilia di Notte by Teofilo De Angelisro at the Teatro Costanzi. She
retired from the operatic stage somewhere around 1920.

Pasini spent almost her entire career in Italy. She performed in most of
Italy's major opera houses including the Teatro Rossetti in Trieste, at
the Teatro Massimo in Palermo, and at the Teatro Comunale Fiume in
Padua, Cremona, Milan and Rome.

Among the many roles she portrayed are Violetta in Verdi's La traviata,
Desdemona in Verdi's Otello, Norina in Donizetti's Don Pasquale, the
title role in Puccini's Tosca, Margherita in Boito's Mefistofele, the
title role in Umberto Giordano's Fedora, the title role in Alfredo
Catalani's La Wally, the title role in Catalani's Loreley, Suzel in
Pietro Mascagni's L'amico Fritz, Elsa in Wagner's Lohengrin, and the
title role in Jules Massenet's Grisélidis.

Sources
=======

-   *Laura Williams Macy - The Grove Book of Opera Singers*

-   *Camilla Pasini biography from Operissimo.com (In German)*

Camilla Pasini biography from Operissimo.com (In German)

Laura Williams Macy - The Grove Book of Opera Singers
