**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Choe%20Sang-hun\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Choe Sang-hun
=============

-   *Choe Sang-Hun (Korean: 최상훈, born 1962) is a Pulitzer
    Prize-winning South Korean journalist and Korea Correspondent for
    The New York Times.*

Choe Sang-Hun (Korean: 최상훈, born 1962) is a Pulitzer Prize-winning
South Korean journalist and Korea Correspondent for The New York Times.

Early life
==========

-   *Choe was born in Ulju-gun, Ulsan in southern South Korea.*

Choe was born in Ulju-gun, Ulsan in southern South Korea. He received a
B.A. in Economics from Yeungnam University and a master's degree in
interpretation and translation from the Hankuk University of Foreign
Studies in Seoul.

Career
======

-   *Choe began his journalism career as a political reporter at The
    Korea Herald, an English-language daily.*

-   *In 2000 he won the Pulitzer Prize for Investigative Reporting for
    bringing to light the decades-old No Gun Ri Massacre along with
    Charles J. Hanley and Martha Mendoza.*

-   *He was the first Korean to receive a Pulitzer Prize.*

Choe began his journalism career as a political reporter at The Korea
Herald, an English-language daily. He joined the Associated Press' Seoul
Bureau in 1994 and covered stories ranging from natural disasters and
North Korea to the 1997 Asian financial crisis. In 2000 he won the
Pulitzer Prize for Investigative Reporting for bringing to light the
decades-old No Gun Ri Massacre along with Charles J. Hanley and Martha
Mendoza. He was the first Korean to receive a Pulitzer Prize. He joined
The New York Times (then The International Herald Tribune) in 2005 as
its Korea Correspondent.

In 2010, he was named as the 2010–2011 academic year Koret Fellow in the
Korean Studies Program at the Walter H. Shorenstein Asia-Pacific
Research Center, part of Stanford University's Freeman Spogli Institute
for International Studies.

Selected works
==============

-   *Kirk, Donald; Choe, Sang-Hun (2006), Korea Witness: 135 years of
    war, crisis and news in the land of the morning calm, Seoul:
    Eunhaeng Namu, ISBN 978-89-5660-155-7, OCLC 708318187*

-   *Choe, Sang-Hun; Torchia, Christopher (2006), Looking for Mr. Kim in
    Seoul: a guide to Korean expressions, New York: Infini Press,
    ISBN 978-1-932457-03-2, OCLC 123193849*

Hanley, Charles J.; Choe, Sang-Hun; Mendoza, Martha (2001), The Bridge
at No Gun Ri: a hidden nightmare from the Korean War, New York: Henry
Holt and Co., ISBN 978-0-8050-6658-6, OCLC 46872329.mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

Kirk, Donald; Choe, Sang-Hun (2006), Korea Witness: 135 years of war,
crisis and news in the land of the morning calm, Seoul: Eunhaeng Namu,
ISBN 978-89-5660-155-7, OCLC 708318187

Choe, Sang-Hun; Torchia, Christopher (2006), Looking for Mr. Kim in
Seoul: a guide to Korean expressions, New York: Infini Press,
ISBN 978-1-932457-03-2, OCLC 123193849

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Home page at the Freeman Spogli Institute for International
    Studies*

-   *Author index at The New York Times*

Home page at the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies

Author index at The New York Times
