**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cistern%2C\_Texas\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Cistern, Texas
==============

-   *Cistern had a population of 75 as of the 2000 census.*

-   *Cistern is an unincorporated community in southwestern Fayette
    County, Texas, United States.*

Cistern is an unincorporated community in southwestern Fayette County,
Texas, United States. It is located on Texas State Highway 95, 12 miles
(19Â km) northwest of Flatonia. It was formerly known as Whiteside's
Prairie and Cockrill's Hill.

Cistern had a population of 75 as of the 2000 census.

History
=======

-   *Cistern is on a hill surrounded by much flatter prairie land.*

-   *It is said that the townspeople went to the large cistern at the
    mercantile store so often that the most common answer given when
    they were asked where they were going was "to the cistern".*

-   *In the 1980s Cistern had 75 residents and three businesses.*

-   *The Cistern Post Office was discontinued in December, 1953, after
    which Cistern residents received mail from Flatonia.*

Cistern is on a hill surrounded by much flatter prairie land.\
Originally it was the portion of a league of land granted to John J.
Whiteside by the government of Mexico in 1835 which early settlers
called "Whiteside's Prairie". Stark S. Cockrill, who came from Missouri
in 1852, was the first settler at the hill where he built a general
merchandise store. Other settlers followed soon after and the town was
surveyed and platted into blocks. At that point the developing town was
known as "Cockrill's Hill" and remained so until 1857 when the
townspeople applied for a post office permit and changed the name of the
town to "Milton" (the name of Cockrill's son). The application for that
name was denied. After deliberations the citizens decided to name the
town "Cistern" because the water wells in the area had high mineral
concentrations requiring that they use cisterns for drinkable water. It
is said that the townspeople went to the large cistern at the mercantile
store so often that the most common answer given when they were asked
where they were going was "to the cistern". The Cistern post office
opened in March 1858,\
and the town has been known by that name ever since.

In 1900 Cistern had 150 residents and a general merchandise store, a
drugstore and saloon, a blacksmith shop with a gin, and a doctor. In
1950 Cistern had 150 people, two stores, two garages. The Cistern Post
Office was discontinued in December, 1953, after which Cistern residents
received mail from Flatonia.\
In the 1950s and 1960s cotton became less popular as a crop, and more
landowners turned to ranching and producing chickens. Some oilfields
were discovered in the 1950s and 1960s, and a number of wells were
drilled, although most were eventually plugged, with the land turned
back into pasture. In the 1980s Cistern had 75 residents and three
businesses. In both the 1990 and 2000 census the community had 75
residents.

Culture
=======

-   *Cistern had Anglo-American, Czech American, and German-American
    residents.*

Cistern had Anglo-American, Czech American, and German-American
residents. The community was focused on Catholic and Lutheran churches,
the Harmony Club, fraternal organizations, and the local school.

Education
=========

-   *During points in its history Cistern had its own school.*

-   *Cistern is within the Flatonia Independent School District.*

-   *In 1950 Cistern had a consolidated high school with two teachers.*

Cistern is within the Flatonia Independent School District. During
points in its history Cistern had its own school. In 1950 Cistern had a
consolidated high school with two teachers.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System:
    Cistern, Texas*

-   *Cistern, Texas from the Handbook of Texas Online*

Cistern, Texas from the Handbook of Texas Online

U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Cistern,
Texas
