**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Civil%20Rights%20Movement\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Civil rights movement
=====================

-   *The civil rights movement (also known as the American civil rights
    movement and other terms) in the United States was a decades-long
    struggle with the goal of enforcing constitutional and legal rights
    for African Americans that other Americans already enjoyed.*

-   *After the American Civil War and the abolition of slavery in the
    1860s, the Reconstruction Amendments to the United States
    Constitution granted emancipation and constitutional rights of
    citizenship to all African Americans, most of whom had recently been
    enslaved.*

The civil rights movement (also known as the American civil rights
movement and other terms) in the United States was a decades-long
struggle with the goal of enforcing constitutional and legal rights for
African Americans that other Americans already enjoyed. With roots that
dated back to the Reconstruction era during the late 19th century, the
movement achieved its largest legislative gains in the mid-1960s, after
years of direct actions and grassroots protests that were organized from
the mid-1950s until 1968. Encompassing strategies, various groups, and
organized social movements to accomplish the goals of ending legalized
racial segregation, disenfranchisement, and discrimination in the United
States, the movement, using major nonviolent campaigns, eventually
secured new recognition in federal law and federal protection for all
Americans.

After the American Civil War and the abolition of slavery in the 1860s,
the Reconstruction Amendments to the United States Constitution granted
emancipation and constitutional rights of citizenship to all African
Americans, most of whom had recently been enslaved. For a period,
African Americans voted and held political office, but they were
increasingly deprived of civil rights, often under Jim Crow laws, and
subjected to discrimination and sustained violence by whites in the
South. Over the following century, various efforts were made by African
Americans to secure their legal rights. Between 1955 and 1968, acts of
nonviolent protest and civil disobedience produced crisis situations and
productive dialogues between activists and government authorities.
Federal, state, and local governments, businesses, and communities often
had to respond immediately to these situations, which highlighted the
inequities faced by African Americans across the country. The lynching
of Chicago teenager Emmett Till in Mississippi, and the outrage
generated by seeing how he had been abused, when his mother decided to
have an open-casket funeral, mobilized the African-American community
nationwide. Forms of protest and/or civil disobedience included
boycotts, such as the successful Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955–56) in
Alabama; "sit-ins" such as the influential Greensboro sit-ins (1960) in
North Carolina and successful Nashville sit-ins in Tennessee; marches,
such as the 1963 Birmingham Children's Crusade and 1965 Selma to
Montgomery marches (1965) in Alabama; and a wide range of other
nonviolent activities.

Moderates in the movement worked with Congress to achieve the passage of
several significant pieces of federal legislation that overturned
discriminatory practices and authorized oversight and enforcement by the
federal government. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 expressly banned
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, or national origin
in employment practices; ended unequal application of voter registration
requirements; and prohibited racial segregation in schools, at the
workplace, and in public accommodations. The Voting Rights Act of 1965
restored and protected voting rights for minorities by authorizing
federal oversight of registration and elections in areas with historic
under-representation of minorities as voters. The Fair Housing Act of
1968 banned discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. African
Americans re-entered politics in the South, and across the country young
people were inspired to take action.

From 1964 through 1970, a wave of inner-city riots in black communities
undercut support from the white middle class, but increased support from
private foundations. The emergence of the Black Power movement, which
lasted from about 1965 to 1975, challenged the established black
leadership for its cooperative attitude and its practice of nonviolence.
Instead, its leaders demanded that, in addition to the new laws gained
through the nonviolent movement, political and economic self-sufficiency
had to be developed in the black community.

Many popular representations of the movement are centered on the
charismatic leadership and philosophy of the Rev. Martin Luther King
Jr., who won the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize for his role in non-violent,
moral leadership. However, some scholars note that the movement was too
diverse to be credited to any one person, organization, or strategy.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.4826990376202973in"}\
*The mob-style lynching of Will James, Cairo, Illinois, 1909*

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.435483377077865in"}\
*Lynching victim Will Brown, who was mutilated and burned during the
Omaha, Nebraska race riot of 1919. Postcards and photographs of
lynchings were popular souvenirs in the U.S.*

![](media/image3.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.06003937007874in"}\
*KKK night rally in Chicago, c. 1920*

![](media/image4.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.7646555118110236in"}\
*Colored Sailors room in World War I*

![](media/image5.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.3654221347331585in"}\
*White tenants seeking to prevent blacks from moving into the housing
project erected this sign, Detroit, 1942.*

Background
==========

-   *Black veterans of the military after both World Wars pressed for
    full civil rights and often led activist movements.*

-   *They resisted it in numerous ways and sought better opportunities
    through lawsuits, new organizations, political redress, and labor
    organizing (see the Civil rights movement (1896–1954)).*

-   *The integration of Southern public libraries followed
    demonstrations and protests that used techniques seen in other
    elements of the larger civil rights movement.*

Before the American Civil War, almost four million blacks were enslaved
in the South, only white men of property could vote, and the
Naturalization Act of 1790 limited U.S. citizenship to whites only.
Following the Civil War, three constitutional amendments were passed,
including the 13th Amendment (1865) that ended slavery; the 14th
Amendment (1868) that gave African-Americans citizenship, adding their
total population of four million to the official population of southern
states for Congressional apportionment; and the 15th Amendment (1870)
that gave African-American males the right to vote (only males could
vote in the U.S. at the time). From 1865 to 1877, the United States
underwent a turbulent Reconstruction Era trying to establish free labor
and civil rights of freedmen in the South after the end of slavery. Many
whites resisted the social changes, leading to insurgent movements such
as the Ku Klux Klan, whose members attacked black and white Republicans
to maintain white supremacy. In 1871, President Ulysses S. Grant, the
U.S. Army, and U.S. Attorney General Amos T. Akerman, initiated a
campaign to repress the KKK under the Enforcement Acts. Some states were
reluctant to enforce the federal measures of the act. In addition, by
the early 1870s, other white supremacist and insurgent paramilitary
groups arose that violently opposed African-American legal equality and
suffrage, intimidating and suppressing black voters, and assassinating
Republican officeholders. However, if the states failed to implement the
acts, the laws allowed the Federal Government to get involved. Many
Republican governors were afraid of sending black militia troops to
fight the Klan for fear of war.

After the disputed election of 1876 resulted in the end of
Reconstruction and federal troops were withdrawn, whites in the South
regained political control of the region's state legislatures. They
continued to intimidate and violently attack blacks before and during
elections to suppress their voting, but the last African Americans were
elected to Congress from the South before disenfranchisement of blacks
by states throughout the region, as described below.

From 1890 to 1908, southern states passed new constitutions and laws to
disenfranchise African Americans and many poor whites by creating
barriers to voter registration; voting rolls were dramatically reduced
as blacks and poor whites were forced out of electoral politics. After
the landmark Supreme Court case of Smith v. Allwright (1944), which
prohibited white primaries, progress was made in increasing black
political participation in the Rim South and Acadiana – although almost
entirely in urban areas and a few rural localities where most blacks
worked outside plantations. The status quo ante of excluding African
Americans from the political system lasted in the remainder of the
South, especially North Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama, until
national civil rights legislation was passed in the mid-1960s to provide
federal enforcement of constitutional voting rights. For more than sixty
years, blacks in the South were essentially excluded from politics,
unable to elect anyone to represent their interests in Congress or local
government. Since they could not vote, they could not serve on local
juries.

During this period, the white-dominated Democratic Party maintained
political control of the South. With whites controlling all the seats
representing the total population of the South, they had a powerful
voting bloc in Congress. The Republican Party—the "party of Lincoln" and
the party to which most blacks had belonged—shrank to insignificance
except in remote Unionist areas of Appalachia and the Ozarks as black
voter registration was suppressed. Until 1965, the “Solid South” was a
one-party system under the white Democrats. Excepting the previously
noted historic Unionist strongholds the Democratic Party nomination was
tantamount to election for state and local office. In 1901, President
Theodore Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington, president of the
Tuskegee Institute, to dine at the White House, making him the first
African American to attend an official dinner there. "The invitation was
roundly criticized by southern politicians and newspapers." Washington
persuaded the president to appoint more blacks to federal posts in the
South and to try to boost African-American leadership in state
Republican organizations. However, these actions were resisted by both
white Democrats and white Republicans as an unwanted federal intrusion
into state politics.

During the same time as African Americans were being disenfranchised,
white southerners imposed racial segregation by law. Violence against
blacks increased, with numerous lynchings through the turn of the
century. The system of de jure state-sanctioned racial discrimination
and oppression that emerged from the post-Reconstruction South became to
be known as the "Jim Crow" system. The United States Supreme Court, made
up almost entirely of Northerners, upheld the constitutionality of those
state laws that required racial segregation in public facilities in its
1896 decision Plessy v. Ferguson, legitimizing them through the
"separate but equal" doctrine. Segregation, which began with slavery,
continued with Jim Crow laws, with signs used to show blacks where they
could legally walk, talk, drink, rest, or eat. For those places that
were racially mixed, non-whites had to wait until all white customers
were served first. Elected in 1912, President Woodrow Wilson gave in to
demands by Southern members of his cabinet and ordered segregation of
workplaces throughout the federal government.

The early 20th century is a period often referred to as the "nadir of
American race relations", when the number of lynchings was highest.
While tensions and civil rights violations were most intense in the
South, social discrimination affected African Americans in other regions
as well. At the national level, the Southern bloc controlled important
committees in Congress, defeated passage of federal laws against
lynching, and exercised considerable power beyond the number of whites
in the South.

Characteristics of the post-Reconstruction period:

Racial segregation. By law, public facilities and government services
such as education were divided into separate "white" and "colored"
domains. Characteristically, those for colored were underfunded and of
inferior quality.

Disenfranchisement. When white Democrats regained power, they passed
laws that made voter registration more restrictive, essentially forcing
black voters off the voting rolls. The number of African-American voters
dropped dramatically, and they were no longer able to elect
representatives. From 1890 to 1908, Southern states of the former
Confederacy created constitutions with provisions that disfranchised
tens of thousands of African Americans, and U.S. states such as Alabama
disenfranchised poor whites as well.

Exploitation. Increased economic oppression of blacks through the
convict lease system, Latinos, and Asians, denial of economic
opportunities, and widespread employment discrimination.

Violence. Individual, police, paramilitary, organizational, and mob
racial violence against blacks (and Latinos in the Southwest and Asians
in the West Coast).

African Americans and other ethnic minorities rejected this regime. They
resisted it in numerous ways and sought better opportunities through
lawsuits, new organizations, political redress, and labor organizing
(see the Civil rights movement (1896–1954)). The National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) was founded in 1909. It
fought to end race discrimination through litigation, education, and
lobbying efforts. Its crowning achievement was its legal victory in the
Supreme Court decision Brown v. Board of Education (1954) when the Court
rejected separate white and colored school systems and, by implication,
overturned the "separate but equal" doctrine established in Plessy v.
Ferguson of 1896. Segregation had continued intact into the mid-1950s.
Following the unanimous Supreme Court decision in Brown v. Board of
Education (1954) that ruled that segregation of public schools was
unconstitutional, many states began to gradually integrate their
schools, but some areas of the South resisted by closing public schools
altogether.

The integration of Southern public libraries followed demonstrations and
protests that used techniques seen in other elements of the larger civil
rights movement. This included sit-ins, beatings, and white resistance.
For example, in 1963 in the city of Anniston, Alabama, two black
ministers were brutally beaten for attempting to integrate the public
library. Though there was resistance and violence, the integration of
libraries was generally quicker than the integration of other public
institutions.

The situation for blacks outside the South was somewhat better (in most
states they could vote and have their children educated, though they
still faced discrimination in housing and jobs). From 1910 to 1970,
African Americans sought better lives by migrating north and west out of
the South. A total of nearly seven million blacks left the South in what
was known as the Great Migration, most during and after World War II. So
many people migrated that the demographics of some previously
black-majority states changed to white majority (in combination with
other developments). The rapid influx of blacks altered the demographics
of Northern and Western cities; happening at a period of expanded
European, Hispanic, and Asian immigration, it added to social
competition and tensions, with the new migrants and immigrants battling
for place in jobs and housing.

Reflecting social tensions after World War I, as veterans struggled to
return to the workforce and labor unions were organizing, the Red Summer
of 1919 was marked by hundreds of deaths and higher casualties across
the U.S. as a result of white race riots against blacks that took place
in more than three dozen cities, such as the Chicago race riot of 1919
and the Omaha race riot of 1919. Urban problems such as crime and
disease were blamed on the large influx of Southern blacks to cities in
the north and west, based on stereotypes of rural southern
African-Americans. Overall, African Americans in Northern and Western
cities experienced systemic discrimination in a plethora of aspects of
life. Within employment, economic opportunities for blacks were routed
to the lowest-status and restrictive in potential mobility. Within the
housing market, stronger discriminatory measures were used in
correlation to the influx, resulting in a mix of "targeted violence,
restrictive covenants, redlining and racial steering". The Great
Migration resulted in many African Americans becoming urbanized, and
they began to realign from the Republican to the Democratic Party,
especially because of opportunities under the New Deal of the Franklin
D. Roosevelt administration during the Great Depression in the 1930s.
Substantially under pressure from African-American supporters who began
the March on Washington Movement, President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued
the first federal order banning discrimination and created the Fair
Employment Practice Committee. Black veterans of the military after both
World Wars pressed for full civil rights and often led activist
movements. In 1948, President Harry Truman issued Executive Order 9981,
which eventually led to the end of segregation in the armed services.

Housing segregation was a nationwide problem, widespread outside the
South. Although the federal government had become increasingly involved
in mortgage lending and development in the 1930s and 1940s, it did not
reject the use of race-restrictive covenants until 1950, in part because
of provisions by the Solid South Democrats in Congress. Suburbanization
became connected with white flight by this time, because whites were
better established economically to move to newer housing. The situation
was perpetuated by real estate agents' continuing racial discrimination.
In particular, from the 1930s to the 1960s, the National Association of
Real Estate Boards (NAREB) issued guidelines that specified that a
realtor "should never be instrumental in introducing to a neighborhood a
character or property or occupancy, members of any race or nationality,
or any individual whose presence will be clearly detrimental to property
values in a neighborhood." The result was the development of all-black
ghettos in the North and West, where much housing was older, as well as
South.

Invigorated by the victory of Brown and frustrated by the lack of
immediate practical effect, private citizens increasingly rejected
gradualist, legalistic approaches as the primary tool to bring about
desegregation. They were faced with "massive resistance" in the South by
proponents of racial segregation and voter suppression. In defiance,
African-American activists adopted a combined strategy of direct action,
nonviolence, nonviolent resistance, and many events described as civil
disobedience, giving rise to the civil rights movement of 1954 to 1968.

The beginnings of direct action (1950s)
=======================================

-   *The strategy of public education, legislative lobbying, and
    litigation that had typified the civil rights movement during the
    first half of the 20th century broadened after Brown to a strategy
    that emphasized "direct action": boycotts, sit-ins, Freedom Rides,
    marches or walks, and similar tactics that relied on mass
    mobilization, nonviolent resistance, standing in line, and, at
    times, civil disobedience.*

The strategy of public education, legislative lobbying, and litigation
that had typified the civil rights movement during the first half of the
20th century broadened after Brown to a strategy that emphasized "direct
action": boycotts, sit-ins, Freedom Rides, marches or walks, and similar
tactics that relied on mass mobilization, nonviolent resistance,
standing in line, and, at times, civil disobedience.\[citation needed\]

Churches, local grassroots organizations, fraternal societies, and
black-owned businesses mobilized volunteers to participate in
broad-based actions. This was a more direct and potentially more rapid
means of creating change than the traditional approach of mounting court
challenges used by the NAACP and others.

In 1952, the Regional Council of Negro Leadership (RCNL), led by T. R.
M. Howard, a black surgeon, entrepreneur, and planter, organized a
successful boycott of gas stations in Mississippi that refused to
provide restrooms for blacks. Through the RCNL, Howard led campaigns to
expose brutality by the Mississippi state highway patrol and to
encourage blacks to make deposits in the black-owned Tri-State Bank of
Nashville which, in turn, gave loans to civil rights activists who were
victims of a "credit squeeze" by the White Citizens' Councils.

After Claudette Colvin was arrested for not giving up her seat on a
Montgomery, Alabama bus in March 1955, a bus boycott was considered and
rejected. But when Rosa Parks was arrested in December, Jo Ann Gibson
Robinson of the Montgomery Women's Political Council put the bus boycott
protest in motion. Late that night, she, John Cannon (chairman of the
Business Department at Alabama State University) and others mimeographed
and distributed thousands of leaflets calling for a boycott. The
eventual success of the boycott made its spokesman Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. a nationally known figure. It also inspired other bus boycotts,
such as the successful Tallahassee, Florida boycott of 1956–57.

In 1957, Dr. King and Rev. Ralph Abernathy, the leaders of the
Montgomery Improvement Association, joined with other church leaders who
had led similar boycott efforts, such as Rev. C. K. Steele of
Tallahassee and Rev. T. J. Jemison of Baton Rouge, and other activists
such as Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth, Ella Baker, A. Philip Randolph, Bayard
Rustin and Stanley Levison, to form the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC). The SCLC, with its headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia,
did not attempt to create a network of chapters as the NAACP did. It
offered training and leadership assistance for local efforts to fight
segregation. The headquarters organization raised funds, mostly from
Northern sources, to support such campaigns. It made nonviolence both
its central tenet and its primary method of confronting racism.

In 1959, Septima Clarke, Bernice Robinson, and Esau Jenkins, with the
help of Myles Horton's Highlander Folk School in Tennessee, began the
first Citizenship Schools in South Carolina's Sea Islands. They taught
literacy to enable blacks to pass voting tests. The program was an
enormous success and tripled the number of black voters on Johns Island.
SCLC took over the program and duplicated its results elsewhere.

History
=======

![](media/image6.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.4125in"}\
*School integration, Barnard School, Washington, D.C., 1955*

Brown v. Board of Education , 1954
==================================

-   *This positive reception for Brown, together with the appointment of
    African American Dr. David Jones to the school board in 1953,
    convinced numerous white and black citizens that Greensboro was
    heading in a progressive direction.*

-   *Even in Greensboro, much local resistance to desegregation
    continued, and in 1969, the federal government found the city was
    not in compliance with the 1964 Civil Rights Act.*

In the spring of 1951, black students in Virginia protested their
unequal status in the state's segregated educational system. Students at
Moton High School protested the overcrowded conditions and failing
facility. Some local leaders of the NAACP had tried to persuade the
students to back down from their protest against the Jim Crow laws of
school segregation. When the students did not budge, the NAACP joined
their battle against school segregation. The NAACP proceeded with five
cases challenging the school systems; these were later combined under
what is known today as Brown v. Board of Education.

On May 17, 1954, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled unanimously in Brown v.
Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas, that mandating, or even
permitting, public schools to be segregated by race was
unconstitutional. The Court stated that the

The lawyers from the NAACP had to gather plausible evidence in order to
win the case of Brown vs. Board of Education. Their method of addressing
the issue of school segregation was to enumerate several arguments. One
pertained to having exposure to interracial contact in a school
environment. It was argued that interracial contact would, in turn, help
prepare children to live with the pressures that society exerts in
regards to race and thereby afford them a better chance of living in a
democracy. In addition, another argument emphasized how "'education'
comprehends the entire process of developing and training the mental,
physical and moral powers and capabilities of human beings".

Risa Goluboff wrote that the NAACP's intention was to show the Courts
that African American children were the victims of school segregation
and their futures were at risk. The Court ruled that both Plessy v.
Ferguson (1896), which had established the "separate but equal" standard
in general, and Cumming v. Richmond County Board of Education (1899),
which had applied that standard to schools, were unconstitutional.

The federal government filed a friend of the court brief in the case
urging the justices to consider the effect that segregation had on
America's image in the Cold War. Secretary of State Dean Acheson was
quoted in the brief stating that "The United States is under constant
attack in the foreign press, over the foreign radio, and in such
international bodies as the United Nations because of various practices
of discrimination in this country."\
\[34\]\[35\]

The following year, in the case known as Brown II, the Court ordered
segregation to be phased out over time, "with all deliberate speed".
Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas (1954) did not overturn
Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). Plessy v. Ferguson was segregation in
transportation modes. Brown v. Board of Education dealt with segregation
in education. Brown v. Board of Education did set in motion the future
overturning of 'separate but equal'.

On May 18, 1954, Greensboro, North Carolina, became the first city in
the South to publicly announce that it would abide by the Supreme
Court's Brown v. Board of Education ruling. "It is unthinkable,'
remarked School Board Superintendent Benjamin Smith, 'that we will try
to \[override\] the laws of the United States." This positive reception
for Brown, together with the appointment of African American Dr. David
Jones to the school board in 1953, convinced numerous white and black
citizens that Greensboro was heading in a progressive direction.
Integration in Greensboro occurred rather peacefully compared to the
process in Southern states such as Alabama, Arkansas, and Virginia where
"massive resistance" was practiced by top officials and throughout the
states. In Virginia, some counties closed their public schools rather
than integrate, and many white Christian private schools were founded to
accommodate students who used to go to public schools. Even in
Greensboro, much local resistance to desegregation continued, and in
1969, the federal government found the city was not in compliance with
the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Transition to a fully integrated school
system did not begin until 1971.

Many Northern cities also had de facto segregation policies, which
resulted in a vast gulf in educational resources between black and white
communities. In Harlem, New York, for example, neither a single new
school was built since the turn of the century, nor did a single nursery
school exist – even as the Second Great Migration was causing
overcrowding. Existing schools tended to be dilapidated and staffed with
inexperienced teachers. Brown helped stimulate activism among New York
City parents like Mae Mallory who, with the support of the NAACP,
initiated a successful lawsuit against the city and state on Brown's
principles. Mallory and thousands of other parents bolstered the
pressure of the lawsuit with a school boycott in 1959. During the
boycott, some of the first freedom schools of the period were
established. The city responded to the campaign by permitting more open
transfers to high-quality, historically-white schools. (New York's
African-American community, and Northern desegregation activists
generally, now found themselves contending with the problem of white
flight, however.)

Emmett Till's murder, 1955
==========================

-   *Emmett Till, a 14-year old African American from Chicago, visited
    his relatives in Money, Mississippi, for the summer.*

-   *The visceral response to his mother's decision to have an
    open-casket funeral mobilized the black community throughout the
    U.S. "Young black people such as Julian Bond, Joyce Ladner and
    others who were born around the same time as Till were galvanized
    into action by the murder and trial."*

-   *Till's family decided to donate the original casket to the
    Smithsonian's National Museum of African American Culture and
    History, where it is now on display.*

Emmett Till, a 14-year old African American from Chicago, visited his
relatives in Money, Mississippi, for the summer. He allegedly had an
interaction with a white woman, Carolyn Bryant, in a small grocery store
that violated the norms of Mississippi culture, and Bryant's husband Roy
and his half-brother J. W. Milam brutally murdered young Emmett Till.
They beat and mutilated him before shooting him in the head and sinking
his body in the Tallahatchie River. Three days later, Till's body was
discovered and retrieved from the river. Mamie Till, Emmett's Mother,
"brought him home to Chicago and insisted on an open casket. Tens of
thousands filed past Till's remains, but it was the publication of the
searing funeral image in Jet, with a stoic Mamie gazing at her murdered
child's ravaged body, that forced the world to reckon with the brutality
of American racism." Vann R. Newkirk wrote: "The trial of his killers
became a pageant illuminating the tyranny of white supremacy". The state
of Mississippi tried two defendants, but they were speedily acquitted by
an all-white jury.

"Emmett's murder," historian Tim Tyson writes, "would never have become
a watershed historical moment without Mamie finding the strength to make
her private grief a public matter." The visceral response to his
mother's decision to have an open-casket funeral mobilized the black
community throughout the U.S. "Young black people such as Julian Bond,
Joyce Ladner and others who were born around the same time as Till were
galvanized into action by the murder and trial." They often see
themselves as the "Emmett Till Generation." One hundred days after
Emmett Till's murder, Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on the bus
in Alabama—indeed, Parks told Mamie Till that "the photograph of
Emmett's disfigured face in the casket was set in her mind when she
refused to give up her seat on the Montgomery bus." The glass topped
casket that was used for Till's Chicago funeral was found in a cemetery
garage in 2009. Till had been reburied in a different casket after being
exhumed in 2005. Till's family decided to donate the original casket to
the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American Culture and
History, where it is now on display. In 2007, Bryant disclosed that she
had fabricated the most sensational part of her story in 1955.

![](media/image7.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.378980752405949in"}\
*Rosa Parks being fingerprinted by Deputy Sheriff D.H. Lackey after
being arrested for not giving up her seat on a bus to a white person*

Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955–1956
====================================================

-   *They were distributed around the city and helped gather the
    attention of civil rights leaders.*

-   *She was later hailed as the "mother of the civil rights movement".*

On December 1, 1955, nine months after a 15-year-old high school
student, Claudette Colvin, refused to give up her seat to a white
passenger on a public bus in Montgomery, Alabama, and was arrested, Rosa
Parks did the same thing. Parks soon became the symbol of the resulting
Montgomery Bus Boycott and received national publicity. She was later
hailed as the "mother of the civil rights movement".

Parks was secretary of the Montgomery NAACP chapter and had recently
returned from a meeting at the Highlander Folk School in Tennessee where
nonviolence as a strategy was taught by Myles Horton and others. After
Parks' arrest, African Americans gathered and organized the Montgomery
Bus Boycott to demand a bus system in which passengers would be treated
equally. The organization was led by Jo Ann Robinson, a member of the
Women's Political Council who had been waiting for the opportunity to
boycott the bus system. Following Rosa Park's arrest, Jo Ann Robinson
mimeographed 52,500 leaflets calling for a boycott. They were
distributed around the city and helped gather the attention of civil
rights leaders. After the city rejected many of their suggested reforms,
the NAACP, led by E. D. Nixon, pushed for full desegregation of public
buses. With the support of most of Montgomery's 50,000 African
Americans, the boycott lasted for 381 days, until the local ordinance
segregating African Americans and whites on public buses was repealed.
Ninety percent of African Americans in Montgomery partook in the
boycotts, which reduced bus revenue significantly, as they comprised the
majority of the riders. In November 1956, the United States Supreme
Court upheld a district court ruling in the case of Browder v. Gayle and
ordered Montgomery's buses desegregated, ending the boycott.

Local leaders established the Montgomery Improvement Association to
focus their efforts. Martin Luther King Jr. was elected President of
this organization. The lengthy protest attracted national attention for
him and the city. His eloquent appeals to Christian brotherhood and
American idealism created a positive impression on people both inside
and outside the South.

![](media/image8.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6279680664916887in"}\
*Troops from the 327th Regiment, 101st Airborne escorting the Little
Rock Nine African-American students up the steps of Central High*

![](media/image9.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.650442913385827in"}\
*White parents rally against integrating Little Rock's schools*

Desegregating Little Rock Central High School, 1957
===================================================

-   *Later, she was expelled for verbally abusing a white female
    student.*

-   *But, Eisenhower federalized the National Guard in Arkansas and
    ordered them to return to their barracks.*

-   *A photo was taken of Eckford being harassed by white protesters
    outside the school, and the police had to take her away in a patrol
    car for her protection.*

A crisis erupted in Little Rock, Arkansas, when Governor of Arkansas
Orval Faubus called out the National Guard on September 4 to prevent
entry to the nine African-American students who had sued for the right
to attend an integrated school, Little Rock Central High School. Under
the guidance of Daisy Bates, the nine students had been chosen to attend
Central High because of their excellent grades.

On the first day of school, 15-year-old Elizabeth Eckford was the only
one of the nine students who showed up because she did not receive the
phone call about the danger of going to school. A photo was taken of
Eckford being harassed by white protesters outside the school, and the
police had to take her away in a patrol car for her protection.
Afterwards, the nine students had to carpool to school and be escorted
by military personnel in jeeps.

Faubus was not a proclaimed segregationist. The Arkansas Democratic
Party, which then controlled politics in the state, put significant
pressure on Faubus after he had indicated he would investigate bringing
Arkansas into compliance with the Brown decision. Faubus then took his
stand against integration and against the Federal court ruling. Faubus'
resistance received the attention of President Dwight D. Eisenhower, who
was determined to enforce the orders of the Federal courts. Critics had
charged he was lukewarm, at best, on the goal of desegregation of public
schools. But, Eisenhower federalized the National Guard in Arkansas and
ordered them to return to their barracks. Eisenhower deployed elements
of the 101st Airborne Division to Little Rock to protect the students.

The students attended high school under harsh conditions. They had to
pass through a gauntlet of spitting, jeering whites to arrive at school
on their first day, and to put up with harassment from other students
for the rest of the year. Although federal troops escorted the students
between classes, the students were teased and even attacked by white
students when the soldiers were not around. One of the Little Rock Nine,
Minnijean Brown, was suspended for spilling a bowl of chilli on the head
of a white student who was harassing her in the school lunch line.
Later, she was expelled for verbally abusing a white female student.

Only Ernest Green of the Little Rock Nine graduated from Central High
School. After the 1957–58 school year was over, Little Rock closed its
public school system completely rather than continue to integrate. Other
school systems across the South followed suit.

The method of Nonviolence and Nonviolence Training
==================================================

-   *According to former civil rights activist Bruce Hartford, there are
    two main branches of nonviolence training.*

-   *During the 1950s and 1960s, the nonviolent protesting of the civil
    rights movement caused definite tension, which gained national
    attention.*

-   *During the time period considered to be the "African-American civil
    rights" era, the predominant use of protest was nonviolent, or
    peaceful.*

During the time period considered to be the "African-American civil
rights" era, the predominant use of protest was nonviolent, or peaceful.
Often referred to as pacifism, the method of nonviolence is considered
to be an attempt to impact society positively. Although acts of racial
discrimination have occurred historically throughout the United States,
perhaps the most violent regions have been in the former Confederate
states. During the 1950s and 1960s, the nonviolent protesting of the
civil rights movement caused definite tension, which gained national
attention.

In order to prepare for protests physically and psychologically,
demonstrators received training in nonviolence. According to former
civil rights activist Bruce Hartford, there are two main branches of
nonviolence training. There is the philosophical method, which involves
understanding the method of nonviolence and why it is considered useful,
and there is the tactical method, which ultimately teaches demonstrators
"how to be a protestor—how to sit-in, how to picket, how to defend
yourself against attack, giving training on how to remain cool when
people are screaming racist insults into your face and pouring stuff on
you and hitting you" (Civil Rights Movement Veterans). The philosophical
method of nonviolence, in the American civil rights movement, was
largely inspired by Mahatma Gandhi's "non-cooperation" with the British
colonists in India, which was intended to gain attention so that the
public would either "intervene in advance," or "provide public pressure
in support of the action to be taken" (Erikson, 415). As Hartford
explains it, philosophical nonviolence training aims to "shape the
individual person's attitude and mental response to crises and violence"
(Civil Rights Movement Veterans). Hartford and activists like him, who
trained in tactical nonviolence, considered it necessary in order to
ensure physical safety, instill discipline, teach demonstrators how to
demonstrate, and form mutual confidence among demonstrators (Civil
Rights Movement Veterans).

For many, the concept of nonviolent protest was a way of life, a
culture. However, not everyone agreed with this notion. James Forman,
former SNCC (and later Black Panther) member and nonviolence trainer,
was among those who did not. In his autobiography, The Making of Black
Revolutionaries, Forman revealed his perspective on the method of
nonviolence as "strictly a tactic, not a way of life without
limitations." Similarly, Bob Moses, who was also an active member of
SNCC, felt that the method of nonviolence was practical. When
interviewed by author Robert Penn Warren, Moses said "There's no
question that he \[Martin Luther King Jr.\] had a great deal of
influence with the masses. But I don't think it's in the direction of
love. It's in a practical direction . . ." (Who Speaks for the Negro?
Warren).

Robert F. Williams and the debate on nonviolence, 1959–1964
===========================================================

-   *Of the many civil rights activists who share this view, the most
    prominent was Rosa Parks.*

-   *Williams' declaration was quoted on the front page of The New York
    Times, and The Carolina Times considered it "the biggest civil
    rights story of 1959."*

-   *This violence played a key role in blocking the progress of the
    civil rights movement in the late 1950s.*

The Jim Crow system employed "terror as a means of social control," with
the most organized manifestations being the Ku Klux Klan and their
collaborators in local police departments. This violence played a key
role in blocking the progress of the civil rights movement in the late
1950s. Some black organizations in the South began practicing armed
self-defense. The first to do so openly was the Monroe, North Carolina,
chapter of the NAACP led by Robert F. Williams. Williams had rebuilt the
chapter after its membership was terrorized out of public life by the
Klan. He did so by encouraging a new, more working-class membership to
arm itself thoroughly and defend against attack. When Klan nightriders
attacked the home of NAACP member Dr. Albert Perry in October 1957,
Williams' militia exchanged gunfire with the stunned Klansmen, who
quickly retreated. The following day, the city council held an emergency
session and passed an ordinance banning KKK motorcades. One year later,
Lumbee Indians in North Carolina would have a similarly successful armed
stand-off with the Klan (known as the Battle of Hayes Pond) which
resulted in KKK leader James W. "Catfish" Cole being convicted of
incitement to riot.

After the acquittal of several white men charged with sexually
assaulting black women in Monroe, Williams announced to United Press
International reporters that he would "meet violence with violence" as a
policy. Williams' declaration was quoted on the front page of The New
York Times, and The Carolina Times considered it "the biggest civil
rights story of 1959." NAACP National chairman Roy Wilkins immediately
suspended Williams from his position, but the Monroe organizer won
support from numerous NAACP chapters across the country. Ultimately,
Wilkins resorted to bribing influential organizer Daisy Bates to
campaign against Williams at the NAACP national convention and the
suspension was upheld. The convention nonetheless passed a resolution
which stated: "We do not deny, but reaffirm the right of individual and
collective self-defense against unlawful assaults." Martin Luther King
Jr. argued for Williams' removal, but Ella Baker and WEB Dubois both
publicly praised the Monroe leader's position.

Williams—along with his wife, Mabel Williams—continued to play a
leadership role in the Monroe movement, and to some degree, in the
national movement. The Williamses published The Crusader, a nationally
circulated newsletter, beginning in 1960, and the influential book
Negroes With Guns in 1962. Williams did not call for full militarization
in this period, but "flexibility in the freedom struggle." Williams was
well-versed in legal tactics and publicity, which he had used
successfully in the internationally known "Kissing Case" of 1958, as
well as nonviolent methods, which he used at lunch counter sit-ins in
Monroe—all with armed self-defense as a complementary tactic.

Williams led the Monroe movement in another armed stand-off with white
supremacists during an August 1961 Freedom Ride; he had been invited to
participate in the campaign by Ella Baker and James Forman of the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC). The incident (along
with his campaigns for peace with Cuba) resulted in him being targeted
by the FBI and prosecuted for kidnapping; he was cleared of all charges
in 1976. Meanwhile, armed self-defense continued discreetly in the
Southern movement with such figures as SNCC's Amzie Moore, Hartman
Turnbow, and Fannie Lou Hamer all willing to use arms to defend their
lives from nightrides. Taking refuge from the FBI in Cuba, the Willamses
broadcast the radio show "Radio Free Dixie" throughout the eastern
United States via Radio Progresso beginning in 1962. In this period,
Williams advocated guerilla warfare against racist institutions, and saw
the large ghetto riots of the era as a manifestation of his strategy.

University of North Carolina historian Walter Rucker has written that
"the emergence of Robert F Williams contributed to the marked decline in
anti-black racial violence in the U.S....After centuries of anti-black
violence, African Americans across the country began to defend their
communities aggressively—employing overt force when necessary. This in
turn evoked in whites real fear of black vengeance..." This opened up
space for African Americans to use nonviolent demonstration with less
fear of deadly reprisal. Of the many civil rights activists who share
this view, the most prominent was Rosa Parks. Parks gave the eulogy at
Williams' funeral in 1996, praising him for "his courage and for his
commitment to freedom," and concluding that "The sacrifices he made, and
what he did, should go down in history and never be forgotten."

Sit-ins, 1958–1960
==================

-   *On March 9, 1960, an Atlanta University Center group of students
    released An Appeal for Human Rights as a full page advertisement in
    newspapers, including the Atlanta Constitution, Atlanta Journal, and
    Atlanta Daily World.*

-   *Known as the Committee on Appeal for Human Rights (COAHR), the
    group initiated the Atlanta Student Movement and began to lead
    sit-ins starting on March 15, 1960.*

-   *In 1960 the technique succeeded in bringing national attention to
    the movement.*

In July 1958, the NAACP Youth Council sponsored sit-ins at the lunch
counter of a Dockum Drug Store in downtown Wichita, Kansas. After three
weeks, the movement successfully got the store to change its policy of
segregated seating, and soon afterwards all Dockum stores in Kansas were
desegregated. This movement was quickly followed in the same year by a
student sit-in at a Katz Drug Store in Oklahoma City led by Clara Luper,
which also was successful.

Mostly black students from area colleges led a sit-in at a Woolworth's
store in Greensboro, North Carolina. On February 1, 1960, four students,
Ezell A. Blair Jr., David Richmond, Joseph McNeil, and Franklin McCain
from North Carolina Agricultural & Technical College, an all-black
college, sat down at the segregated lunch counter to protest Woolworth's
policy of excluding African Americans from being served food there. The
four students purchased small items in other parts of the store and kept
their receipts, then sat down at the lunch counter and asked to be
served. After being denied service, they produced their receipts and
asked why their money was good everywhere else at the store, but not at
the lunch counter.

The protesters had been encouraged to dress professionally, to sit
quietly, and to occupy every other stool so that potential white
sympathizers could join in. The Greensboro sit-in was quickly followed
by other sit-ins in Richmond, Virginia; Nashville, Tennessee; and
Atlanta, Georgia. The most immediately effective of these was in
Nashville, where hundreds of well organized and highly disciplined
college students conducted sit-ins in coordination with a boycott
campaign.\
As students across the south began to "sit-in" at the lunch counters of
local stores, police and other officials sometimes used brutal force to
physically escort the demonstrators from the lunch facilities.

The "sit-in" technique was not new—as far back as 1939, African-American
attorney Samuel Wilbert Tucker organized a sit-in at the then-segregated
Alexandria, Virginia, library. In 1960 the technique succeeded in
bringing national attention to the movement.\
On March 9, 1960, an Atlanta University Center group of students
released An Appeal for Human Rights as a full page advertisement in
newspapers, including the Atlanta Constitution, Atlanta Journal, and
Atlanta Daily World. Known as the Committee on Appeal for Human Rights
(COAHR), the group initiated the Atlanta Student Movement and began to
lead sit-ins starting on March 15, 1960. By the end of 1960, the process
of sit-ins had spread to every southern and border state, and even to
facilities in Nevada, Illinois, and Ohio that discriminated against
blacks.

Demonstrators focused not only on lunch counters but also on parks,
beaches, libraries, theaters, museums, and other public facilities. In
April 1960 activists who had led these sit-ins were invited by SCLC
activist Ella Baker to hold a conference at Shaw University, a
historically black university in Raleigh, North Carolina. This
conference led to the formation of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee (SNCC). SNCC took these tactics of nonviolent confrontation
further, and organized the freedom rides. As the constitution protected
interstate commerce, they decided to challenge segregation on interstate
buses and in public bus facilities by putting interracial teams on them,
to travel from the North through the segregated South.

![](media/image10.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.149899387576553in"}\
*A mob beats Freedom Riders in Birmingham. This picture was reclaimed by
the FBI from a local journalist who also was beaten and whose camera was
smashed.*

Freedom Rides, 1961
===================

-   *Freedom Rides were journeys by civil rights activists on interstate
    buses into the segregated southern United States to test the United
    States Supreme Court decision Boynton v. Virginia, 364 U.S. 454
    (1960), which ruled that segregation was unconstitutional for
    passengers engaged in interstate travel.*

Freedom Rides were journeys by civil rights activists on interstate
buses into the segregated southern United States to test the United
States Supreme Court decision Boynton v. Virginia, 364 U.S. 454 (1960),
which ruled that segregation was unconstitutional for passengers engaged
in interstate travel. Organized by CORE, the first Freedom Ride of the
1960s left Washington D.C. on May 4, 1961, and was scheduled to arrive
in New Orleans on May 17.

During the first and subsequent Freedom Rides, activists travelled
through the Deep South to integrate seating patterns on buses and
desegregate bus terminals, including restrooms and water fountains. That
proved to be a dangerous mission. In Anniston, Alabama, one bus was
firebombed, forcing its passengers to flee for their lives.

In Birmingham, Alabama, an FBI informant reported that Public Safety
Commissioner Eugene "Bull" Connor gave Ku Klux Klan members fifteen
minutes to attack an incoming group of freedom riders before having
police "protect" them. The riders were severely beaten "until it looked
like a bulldog had got a hold of them." James Peck, a white activist,
was beaten so badly that he required fifty stitches to his head.

In a similar occurrence in Montgomery, Alabama, the Freedom Riders
followed in the footsteps of Rosa Parks and rode an integrated Greyhound
bus from Birmingham. Although they were protesting interstate bus
segregation in peace, they were met with violence in Montgomery as a
large, white mob attacked them for their activism. They caused an
enormous, 2-hour long riot which resulted in 22 injuries, five of whom
were hospitalized.

Mob violence in Anniston and Birmingham temporarily halted the rides.
SNCC activists from Nashville brought in new riders to continue the
journey from Birmingham to New Orleans. In Montgomery, Alabama, at the
Greyhound Bus Station, a mob charged another bus load of riders,
knocking John Lewis unconscious with a crate and smashing Life
photographer Don Urbrock in the face with his own camera. A dozen men
surrounded James Zwerg, a white student from Fisk University, and beat
him in the face with a suitcase, knocking out his teeth.

On May 24, 1961, the freedom riders continued their rides into Jackson,
Mississippi, where they were arrested for "breaching the peace" by using
"white only" facilities. New Freedom Rides were organized by many
different organizations and continued to flow into the South. As riders
arrived in Jackson, they were arrested. By the end of summer, more than
300 had been jailed in Mississippi.

The jailed freedom riders were treated harshly, crammed into tiny,
filthy cells and sporadically beaten. In Jackson, some male prisoners
were forced to do hard labor in 100 °F heat. Others were transferred to
the Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman, where they were treated
to harsh conditions. Sometimes the men were suspended by "wrist
breakers" from the walls. Typically, the windows of their cells were
shut tight on hot days, making it hard for them to breathe.

Public sympathy and support for the freedom riders led John F. Kennedy's
administration to order the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to
issue a new desegregation order. When the new ICC rule took effect on
November 1, 1961, passengers were permitted to sit wherever they chose
on the bus; "white" and "colored" signs came down in the terminals;
separate drinking fountains, toilets, and waiting rooms were
consolidated; and lunch counters began serving people regardless of skin
color.

The student movement involved such celebrated figures as John Lewis, a
single-minded activist; James Lawson, the revered "guru" of nonviolent
theory and tactics; Diane Nash, an articulate and intrepid public
champion of justice; Bob Moses, pioneer of voting registration in
Mississippi; and James Bevel, a fiery preacher and charismatic
organizer, strategist, and facilitator. Other prominent student
activists included Charles McDew, Bernard Lafayette, Charles Jones,
Lonnie King, Julian Bond, Hosea Williams, and Stokely Carmichael.

Voter registration organizing
=============================

-   *White opposition to black voter registration was so intense in
    Mississippi that Freedom Movement activists concluded that all of
    the state's civil rights organizations had to unite in a coordinated
    effort to have any chance of success.*

-   *Finally, in December 1960, the Justice Department invoked its
    powers authorized by the Civil Rights Act of 1957 to file a suit
    against seventy parties accused of violating the civil rights of
    black Fayette County citizens.*

After the Freedom Rides, local black leaders in Mississippi such as
Amzie Moore, Aaron Henry, Medgar Evers, and others asked SNCC to help
register black voters and to build community organizations that could
win a share of political power in the state. Since Mississippi ratified
its new constitution in 1890 with provisions such as poll taxes,
residency requirements, and literacy tests, it made registration more
complicated and stripped blacks from voter rolls and voting. Also,
violence at the time of elections had earlier suppressed black voting.

By the mid-20th century, preventing blacks from voting had become an
essential part of the culture of white supremacy. In June and July 1959,
members of the black community in Fayette County, TN formed the Fayette
County Civic and Welfare League to spur voting. At the time, there were
16,927 blacks in the county, yet only 17 of them had voted in the
previous seven years. Within a year, some 1,400 blacks had registered,
and the white community responded with harsh economic reprisals. Using
registration rolls, the White Citizens Council circulated a blacklist of
all registered black voters, allowing banks, local stores, and gas
stations to conspire to deny registered black voters essential services.
What's more, sharecropping blacks who registered to vote were getting
evicted from their homes. All in all, the number of evictions came to
257 families, many of whom were forced to live in a makeshift Tent City
for well over a year. Finally, in December 1960, the Justice Department
invoked its powers authorized by the Civil Rights Act of 1957 to file a
suit against seventy parties accused of violating the civil rights of
black Fayette County citizens. In the following year the first voter
registration project in McComb and the surrounding counties in the
Southwest corner of the state. Their efforts were met with violent
repression from state and local lawmen, the White Citizens' Council, and
the Ku Klux Klan. Activists were beaten, there were hundreds of arrests
of local citizens, and the voting activist Herbert Lee was murdered.

White opposition to black voter registration was so intense in
Mississippi that Freedom Movement activists concluded that all of the
state's civil rights organizations had to unite in a coordinated effort
to have any chance of success. In February 1962, representatives of
SNCC, CORE, and the NAACP formed the Council of Federated Organizations
(COFO). At a subsequent meeting in August, SCLC became part of COFO.

In the Spring of 1962, with funds from the Voter Education Project,
SNCC/COFO began voter registration organizing in the Mississippi Delta
area around Greenwood, and the areas surrounding Hattiesburg, Laurel,
and Holly Springs. As in McComb, their efforts were met with fierce
opposition—arrests, beatings, shootings, arson, and murder. Registrars
used the literacy test to keep blacks off the voting rolls by creating
standards that even highly educated people could not meet. In addition,
employers fired blacks who tried to register, and landlords evicted them
from their rental homes. Despite these actions, over the following
years, the black voter registration campaign spread across the state.

Similar voter registration campaigns—with similar responses—were begun
by SNCC, CORE, and SCLC in Louisiana, Alabama, southwest Georgia, and
South Carolina. By 1963, voter registration campaigns in the South were
as integral to the Freedom Movement as desegregation efforts. After the
passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, protecting and facilitating
voter registration despite state barriers became the main effort of the
movement. It resulted in passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which
had provisions to enforce the constitutional right to vote for all
citizens.

![](media/image11.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6863265529308835in"}\
*James Meredith walking to class accompanied by U.S. marshals*

![](media/image12.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.9211023622047243in"}\
*U.S. Army trucks loaded with U.S. Marshals on the University of
Mississippi campus*

Integration of Mississippi universities, 1956–1965
==================================================

-   *It was not until after passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act that
    most blacks in Mississippi and other southern states gained federal
    protection to enforce the constitutional right of citizens to vote.*

-   *The state-funded organization tried to counter the civil rights
    movement by positively portraying segregationist policies.*

Beginning in 1956, Clyde Kennard, a black Korean War-veteran, wanted to
enroll at Mississippi Southern College (now the University of Southern
Mississippi) at Hattiesburg under the G.I. Bill. Dr. William David
McCain, the college president, used the Mississippi State Sovereignty
Commission, in order to prevent his enrollment by appealing to local
black leaders and the segregationist state political establishment.

The state-funded organization tried to counter the civil rights movement
by positively portraying segregationist policies. More significantly, it
collected data on activists, harassed them legally, and used economic
boycotts against them by threatening their jobs (or causing them to lose
their jobs) to try to suppress their work.

Kennard was twice arrested on trumped-up charges, and eventually
convicted and sentenced to seven years in the state prison. After three
years at hard labor, Kennard was paroled by Mississippi Governor Ross
Barnett. Journalists had investigated his case and publicized the
state's mistreatment of his colon cancer.

McCain's role in Kennard's arrests and convictions is unknown. While
trying to prevent Kennard's enrollment, McCain made a speech in Chicago,
with his travel sponsored by the Mississippi State Sovereignty
Commission. He described the blacks' seeking to desegregate Southern
schools as "imports" from the North. (Kennard was a native and resident
of Hattiesburg.) McCain said:

Note: Mississippi had passed a new constitution in 1890 that effectively
disfranchised most blacks by changing electoral and voter registration
requirements; although it deprived them of constitutional rights
authorized under post-Civil War amendments, it survived U.S. Supreme
Court challenges at the time. It was not until after passage of the 1965
Voting Rights Act that most blacks in Mississippi and other southern
states gained federal protection to enforce the constitutional right of
citizens to vote.

In September 1962, James Meredith won a lawsuit to secure admission to
the previously segregated University of Mississippi. He attempted to
enter campus on September 20, on September 25, and again on September
26. He was blocked by Mississippi Governor Ross Barnett, who said,
"\[N\]o school will be integrated in Mississippi while I am your
Governor." The Fifth U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals held Barnett and
Lieutenant Governor Paul B. Johnson Jr. in contempt, ordering them
arrested and fined more than \$10,000 for each day they refused to allow
Meredith to enroll.

Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent in a force of U.S. Marshals. On
September 30, 1962, Meredith entered the campus under their escort.
Students and other whites began rioting that evening, throwing rocks and
firing on the U.S. Marshals guarding Meredith at Lyceum Hall. Two
people, including a French journalist, were killed; 28 marshals suffered
gunshot wounds, and 160 others were injured. President John F. Kennedy
sent regular U.S. Army forces to the campus to quell the riot. Meredith
began classes the day after the troops arrived.

Kennard and other activists continued to work on public university
desegregation. In 1965 Raylawni Branch and Gwendolyn Elaine Armstrong
became the first African-American students to attend the University of
Southern Mississippi. By that time, McCain helped ensure they had a
peaceful entry. In 2006, Judge Robert Helfrich ruled that Kennard was
factually innocent of all charges for which he had been convicted in the
1950s.

Albany Movement, 1961–62
========================

-   *King left in 1962 without having achieved any dramatic victories.*

-   *The campaign was a failure because of the canny tactics of Laurie
    Pritchett, the local police chief, and divisions within the black
    community.*

-   *The local movement, however, continued the struggle, and it
    obtained significant gains in the next few years.*

-   *Pritchett also foresaw King's presence as a danger and forced his
    release to avoid King's rallying the black community.*

The SCLC, which had been criticized by some student activists for its
failure to participate more fully in the freedom rides, committed much
of its prestige and resources to a desegregation campaign in Albany,
Georgia, in November 1961. King, who had been criticized personally by
some SNCC activists for his distance from the dangers that local
organizers faced—and given the derisive nickname "De Lawd" as a
result—intervened personally to assist the campaign led by both SNCC
organizers and local leaders.

The campaign was a failure because of the canny tactics of Laurie
Pritchett, the local police chief, and divisions within the black
community. The goals may not have been specific enough. Pritchett
contained the marchers without violent attacks on demonstrators that
inflamed national opinion. He also arranged for arrested demonstrators
to be taken to jails in surrounding communities, allowing plenty of room
to remain in his jail. Pritchett also foresaw King's presence as a
danger and forced his release to avoid King's rallying the black
community. King left in 1962 without having achieved any dramatic
victories. The local movement, however, continued the struggle, and it
obtained significant gains in the next few years.

![](media/image13.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.643992782152231in"}\
*Congress of Racial Equality march in Washington D.C. on September 22,
1963, in memory of the children killed in the Birmingham bombings*

Birmingham campaign, 1963
=========================

-   *They bombed the Gaston Motel, which housed the SCLC's unofficial
    headquarters, and the home of King's brother, the Reverend A. D.
    King.*

-   *The Albany movement was shown to be an important education for the
    SCLC, however, when it undertook the Birmingham campaign in 1963.*

-   *Not everyone in the black community approved of the agreement—the
    Rev.*

The Albany movement was shown to be an important education for the SCLC,
however, when it undertook the Birmingham campaign in 1963. Executive
Director Wyatt Tee Walker carefully planned the early strategy and
tactics for the campaign. It focused on one goal—the desegregation of
Birmingham's downtown merchants, rather than total desegregation, as in
Albany.

The movement's efforts were helped by the brutal response of local
authorities, in particular Eugene "Bull" Connor, the Commissioner of
Public Safety. He had long held much political power but had lost a
recent election for mayor to a less rabidly segregationist candidate.
Refusing to accept the new mayor's authority, Connor intended to stay in
office.

The campaign used a variety of nonviolent methods of confrontation,
including sit-ins, kneel-ins at local churches, and a march to the
county building to mark the beginning of a drive to register voters. The
city, however, obtained an injunction barring all such protests.
Convinced that the order was unconstitutional, the campaign defied it
and prepared for mass arrests of its supporters. King elected to be
among those arrested on April 12, 1963.

While in jail, King wrote his famous "Letter from Birmingham Jail" on
the margins of a newspaper, since he had not been allowed any writing
paper while held in solitary confinement. Supporters appealed to the
Kennedy administration, which intervened to obtain King's release. King
was allowed to call his wife, who was recuperating at home after the
birth of their fourth child and was released early on April 19.

The campaign, however, faltered as it ran out of demonstrators willing
to risk arrest. James Bevel, SCLC's Director of Direct Action and
Director of Nonviolent Education, then came up with a bold and
controversial alternative: to train high school students to take part in
the demonstrations. As a result, in what would be called the Children's
Crusade, more than one thousand students skipped school on May 2 to meet
at the 16th Street Baptist Church to join the demonstrations. More than
six hundred marched out of the church fifty at a time in an attempt to
walk to City Hall to speak to Birmingham's mayor about segregation. They
were arrested and put into jail.

In this first encounter, the police acted with restraint. On the next
day, however, another one thousand students gathered at the church. When
Bevel started them marching fifty at a time, Bull Connor finally
unleashed police dogs on them and then turned the city's fire hoses
water streams on the children. National television networks broadcast
the scenes of the dogs attacking demonstrators and the water from the
fire hoses knocking down the schoolchildren.

Widespread public outrage led the Kennedy administration to intervene
more forcefully in negotiations between the white business community and
the SCLC. On May 10, the parties announced an agreement to desegregate
the lunch counters and other public accommodations downtown, to create a
committee to eliminate discriminatory hiring practices, to arrange for
the release of jailed protesters, and to establish regular means of
communication between black and white leaders.

Not everyone in the black community approved of the agreement—the Rev.
Fred Shuttlesworth was particularly critical, since he was skeptical
about the good faith of Birmingham's power structure from his experience
in dealing with them. Parts of the white community reacted violently.
They bombed the Gaston Motel, which housed the SCLC's unofficial
headquarters, and the home of King's brother, the Reverend A. D. King.
In response, thousands of blacks rioted, burning numerous buildings and
one of them stabbed and wounded a police officer.

Kennedy prepared to federalize the Alabama National Guard if the need
arose. Four months later, on September 15, a conspiracy of Ku Klux Klan
members bombed the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church in Birmingham,
killing four young girls.

![](media/image14.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.939828302712161in"}\
*Alabama governor George Wallace stands against desegregation at the
University of Alabama and is confronted by U.S. Deputy Attorney General
Nicholas Katzenbach in 1963*

"Rising tide of discontent" and Kennedy's response, 1963
========================================================

-   *He called on Congress to pass new civil rights legislation, and
    urged the country to embrace civil rights as "a moral issue...in our
    daily lives."*

-   *The blacks criticized Kennedy harshly for vacillating on civil
    rights, and said that the African-American community's thoughts were
    increasingly turning to violence.*

Birmingham was only one of over a hundred cities rocked by the chaotic
protest that spring and summer, some of them in the North but mainly in
the South. During the March on Washington, Martin Luther King would
refer to such protests as "the whirlwinds of revolt." In Chicago, blacks
rioted through the South Side in late May after a white police officer
shot a fourteen-year-old black boy who was fleeing the scene of a
robbery. Violent clashes between black activists and white workers took
place in both Philadelphia and Harlem in successful efforts to integrate
state construction projects. On June 6, over a thousand whites attacked
a sit-in in Lexington, North Carolina; blacks fought back and one white
man was killed. Edwin C. Berry of the National Urban League warned of a
complete breakdown in race relations: "My message from the beer gardens
and the barbershops all indicate the fact that the Negro is ready for
war."

In Cambridge, Maryland, a working‐class city on the Eastern Shore,
Gloria Richardson of SNCC led a movement that pressed for desegregation
but also demanded low‐rent public housing, job‐training, public and
private jobs, and an end to police brutality. On June 11, struggles
between blacks and whites escalated into violent rioting, leading
Maryland Governor J. Millard Tawes to declare martial law. When
negotiations between Richardson and Maryland officials faltered,
Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy directly intervened to negotiate a
desegregation agreement. Richardson felt that the increasing
participation of poor and working-class blacks was expanding both the
power and parameters of the movement, asserting that "the people as a
whole really do have more intelligence than a few of their leaders.ʺ

In their deliberations during this wave of protests, the Kennedy
administration privately felt that militant demonstrations were ʺbad for
the countryʺ and that "Negroes are going to push this thing too far." On
May 24, Robert Kennedy had a meeting with prominent black intellectuals
to discuss the racial situation. The blacks criticized Kennedy harshly
for vacillating on civil rights, and said that the African-American
community's thoughts were increasingly turning to violence. The meeting
ended with ill will on all sides. Nonetheless, the Kennedys ultimately
decided that new legislation for equal public accommodations was
essential to drive activists "into the courts and out of the streets."

On June 11, 1963, George Wallace, Governor of Alabama, tried to block
the integration of the University of Alabama. President John F. Kennedy
sent a military force to make Governor Wallace step aside, allowing the
enrollment of Vivian Malone Jones and James Hood. That evening,
President Kennedy addressed the nation on TV and radio with his historic
civil rights speech, where he lamented "a rising tide of discontent that
threatens the public safety." He called on Congress to pass new civil
rights legislation, and urged the country to embrace civil rights as "a
moral issue...in our daily lives." In the early hours of June 12, Medgar
Evers, field secretary of the Mississippi NAACP, was assassinated by a
member of the Klan. The next week, as promised, on June 19, 1963,
President Kennedy submitted his Civil Rights bill to Congress.

![](media/image15.jpg){width="4.29in" height="5.5in"}\
*Bayard Rustin (left) and Cleveland Robinson (right), organizers of the
March, on August 7, 1963*

![](media/image16.jpg){width="3.6740004374453195in" height="5.5in"}\
*The March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom at the National Mall*

![](media/image17.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.360464785651794in"}\
*Martin Luther King Jr. at a Civil Rights March on Washington, D.C.*

March on Washington, 1963
=========================

-   *In 1963, the Kennedy administration initially opposed the march out
    of concern it would negatively impact the drive for passage of civil
    rights legislation.*

-   *After the march, King and other civil rights leaders met with
    President Kennedy at the White House.*

-   *meaningful civil rights laws*

-   *Of these, the march's major focus was on passage of the civil
    rights law that the Kennedy administration had proposed after the
    upheavals in Birmingham.*

A. Philip Randolph had planned a march on Washington, D.C., in 1941 to
support demands for elimination of employment discrimination in defense
industries; he called off the march when the Roosevelt administration
met the demand by issuing Executive Order 8802 barring racial
discrimination and creating an agency to oversee compliance with the
order.

Randolph and Bayard Rustin were the chief planners of the second march,
which they proposed in 1962. In 1963, the Kennedy administration
initially opposed the march out of concern it would negatively impact
the drive for passage of civil rights legislation. However, Randolph and
King were firm that the march would proceed. With the march going
forward, the Kennedys decided it was important to work to ensure its
success. Concerned about the turnout, President Kennedy enlisted the aid
of white church leaders and Walter Reuther, president of the UAW, to
help mobilize white supporters for the march.

The march was held on August 28, 1963. Unlike the planned 1941 march,
for which Randolph included only black-led organizations in the
planning, the 1963 march was a collaborative effort of all of the major
civil rights organizations, the more progressive wing of the labor
movement, and other liberal organizations. The march had six official
goals:

meaningful civil rights laws

a massive federal works program

full and fair employment

decent housing

the right to vote

adequate integrated education.

Of these, the march's major focus was on passage of the civil rights law
that the Kennedy administration had proposed after the upheavals in
Birmingham.

National media attention also greatly contributed to the march's
national exposure and probable impact. In the essay "The March on
Washington and Television News," historian William Thomas notes: "Over
five hundred cameramen, technicians, and correspondents from the major
networks were set to cover the event. More cameras would be set up than
had filmed the last presidential inauguration. One camera was positioned
high in the Washington Monument, to give dramatic vistas of the
marchers". By carrying the organizers' speeches and offering their own
commentary, television stations framed the way their local audiences saw
and understood the event.

The march was a success, although not without controversy. An estimated
200,000 to 300,000 demonstrators gathered in front of the Lincoln
Memorial, where King delivered his famous "I Have a Dream" speech. While
many speakers applauded the Kennedy administration for the efforts it
had made toward obtaining new, more effective civil rights legislation
protecting the right to vote and outlawing segregation, John Lewis of
SNCC took the administration to task for not doing more to protect
southern blacks and civil rights workers under attack in the Deep South.

After the march, King and other civil rights leaders met with President
Kennedy at the White House. While the Kennedy administration appeared
sincerely committed to passing the bill, it was not clear that it had
enough votes in Congress to do so. However, when President Kennedy was
assassinated on November 22, 1963, the new President Lyndon Johnson
decided to use his influence in Congress to bring about much of
Kennedy's legislative agenda.

![](media/image18.jpg){width="5.015999562554681in" height="5.5in"}\
*Malcolm X meets with Martin Luther King Jr., March 26, 1964*

Malcolm X joins the movement, 1964–1965
=======================================

-   *On March 26, 1964, as the Civil Rights Act was facing stiff
    opposition in Congress, Malcolm had a public meeting with Martin
    Luther King Jr. at the Capitol.*

-   *As noted in the PBS documentary Eyes on the Prize, "Malcolm X had a
    far reaching effect on the civil rights movement.*

-   *In March 1964, Malcolm X (el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz), national
    representative of the Nation of Islam, formally broke with that
    organization, and made a public offer to collaborate with any civil
    rights organization that accepted the right to self-defense and the
    philosophy of Black nationalism (which Malcolm said no longer
    required Black separatism).*

In March 1964, Malcolm X (el-Hajj Malik el-Shabazz), national
representative of the Nation of Islam, formally broke with that
organization, and made a public offer to collaborate with any civil
rights organization that accepted the right to self-defense and the
philosophy of Black nationalism (which Malcolm said no longer required
Black separatism). Gloria Richardson, head of the Cambridge, Maryland,
chapter of SNCC, and leader of the Cambridge rebellion, an honored guest
at The March on Washington, immediately embraced Malcolm's offer. Mrs.
Richardson, "the nation's most prominent woman \[civil rights\] leader,"
told The Baltimore Afro-American that "Malcolm is being very
practical...The federal government has moved into conflict situations
only when matters approach the level of insurrection. Self-defense may
force Washington to intervene sooner." Earlier, in May 1963, writer and
activist James Baldwin had stated publicly that "the Black Muslim
movement is the only one in the country we can call grassroots, I hate
to say it...Malcolm articulates for Negroes, their suffering...he
corroborates their reality..." On the local level, Malcolm and the NOI
had been allied with the Harlem chapter of the Congress of Racial
Equality (CORE) since at least 1962.

On March 26, 1964, as the Civil Rights Act was facing stiff opposition
in Congress, Malcolm had a public meeting with Martin Luther King Jr. at
the Capitol. Malcolm had tried to begin a dialog with Dr. King as early
as 1957, but King had rebuffed him. Malcolm had responded by calling
King an "Uncle Tom", saying he had turned his back on black militancy in
order to appease the white power structure. But the two men were on good
terms at their face-to-face meeting. There is evidence that King was
preparing to support Malcolm's plan to formally bring the U.S.
government before the United Nations on charges of human rights
violations against African Americans. Malcolm now encouraged Black
nationalists to get involved in voter registration drives and other
forms of community organizing to redefine and expand the movement.

Civil rights activists became increasingly combative in the 1963 to 1964
period, seeking to defy such events as the thwarting of the Albany
campaign, police repression and Ku Klux Klan terrorism in Birmingham,
and the assassination of Medgar Evers. The latter's brother Charles
Evers, who took over as Mississippi NAACP Field Director, told a public
NAACP conference on February 15, 1964, that "non-violence won't work in
Mississippi...we made up our minds...that if a white man shoots at a
Negro in Mississippi, we will shoot back." The repression of sit-ins in
Jacksonville, Florida, provoked a riot in which black youth threw
Molotov cocktails at police on March 24, 1964. Malcolm X gave numerous
speeches in this period warning that such militant activity would
escalate further if African Americans' rights were not fully recognized.
In his landmark April 1964 speech "The Ballot or the Bullet", Malcolm
presented an ultimatum to white America: "There's new strategy coming
in. It'll be Molotov cocktails this month, hand grenades next month, and
something else next month. It'll be ballots, or it'll be bullets."

As noted in the PBS documentary Eyes on the Prize, "Malcolm X had a far
reaching effect on the civil rights movement. In the South, there had
been a long tradition of self reliance. Malcolm X's ideas now touched
that tradition". Self-reliance was becoming paramount in light of the
1964 Democratic National Convention's decision to refuse seating to the
Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (MFDP) and instead to seat the
regular state delegation, which had been elected in violation of the
party's own rules, and by Jim Crow law instead. SNCC moved in an
increasingly militant direction and worked with Malcolm X on two Harlem
MFDP fundraisers in December 1964.

When Fannie Lou Hamer spoke to Harlemites about the Jim Crow violence
that she'd suffered in Mississippi, she linked it directly to the
Northern police brutality against blacks that Malcolm protested against;
When Malcolm asserted that African Americans should emulate the Mau Mau
army of Kenya in efforts to gain their independence, many in SNCC
applauded.

During the Selma campaign for voting rights in 1965, Malcolm made it
known that he'd heard reports of increased threats of lynching around
Selma. In late January he sent an open telegram to George Lincoln
Rockwell, the head of the American Nazi Party, stating:

The following month, the Selma chapter of SNCC invited Malcolm to speak
to a mass meeting there. On the day of Malcolm's appearance, President
Johnson made his first public statement in support of the Selma
campaign. Paul Ryan Haygood, a co-director of the NAACP Legal Defense
Fund, credits Malcolm with a role in gaining support by the federal
government. Haygood noted that "shortly after Malcolm's visit to Selma,
a federal judge, responding to a suit brought by the Department of
Justice, required Dallas County, Alabama, registrars to process at least
100 Black applications each day their offices were open."

![](media/image19.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.235112642169729in"}\
*"We Cater to White Trade Only" sign on a restaurant window in
Lancaster, Ohio, in 1938. In 1964, Martin Luther King Jr. was arrested
and spent a night in jail for attempting to eat at a white-only
restaurant in St. Augustine, Florida.*

St. Augustine, Florida, 1963–64
===============================

-   *It became the stage for a great drama leading up to the passage of
    the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964.*

-   *The horrifying photograph was run on the front page of a Washington
    newspaper the day the Senate were to vote on passing the Civil
    Rights Act of 1964.*

-   *A local movement, led by Dr. Robert B. Hayling, a black dentist and
    Air Force veteran affiliated with the NAACP, had been picketing
    segregated local institutions since 1963.*

St. Augustine was famous as the "Nation's Oldest City", founded by the
Spanish in 1565. It became the stage for a great drama leading up to the
passage of the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964. A local movement, led
by Dr. Robert B. Hayling, a black dentist and Air Force veteran
affiliated with the NAACP, had been picketing segregated local
institutions since 1963. In the fall of 1964, Hayling and three
companions were brutally beaten at a Ku Klux Klan rally.

Nightriders shot into black homes, and teenagers Audrey Nell Edwards,
JoeAnn Anderson, Samuel White, and Willie Carl Singleton (who came to be
known as "The St. Augustine Four") sat in at a local Woolworth's lunch
counter, seeking to get served. They were arrested and convicted of
trespassing, and sentenced to six months in jail and reform school. It
took a special act of the governor and cabinet of Florida to release
them after national protests by the Pittsburgh Courier, Jackie Robinson,
and others.

In response to the repression, the St. Augustine movement practiced
armed self-defense in addition to nonviolent direct action. In June
1963, Dr. Hayling publicly stated that "I and the others have armed. We
will shoot first and answer questions later. We are not going to die
like Medgar Evers." The comment made national headlines. When Klan
nightriders terrorized black neighborhoods in St. Augustine, Hayling's
NAACP members often drove them off with gunfire. In October 1963, a
Klansman was killed.

In 1964, Dr. Hayling and other activists urged the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference to come to St. Augustine. Four prominent
Massachusetts women – Mary Parkman Peabody, Esther Burgess, Hester
Campbell (all of whose husbands were Episcopal bishops), and Florence
Rowe (whose husband was vice president of John Hancock Insurance
Company) – also came to lend their support. The arrest of Mrs. Peabody,
the 72-year-old mother of the governor of Massachusetts, for attempting
to eat at the segregated Ponce de Leon Motor Lodge in an integrated
group, made front-page news across the country and brought the movement
in St. Augustine to the attention of the world.

Widely publicized activities continued in the ensuing months. When Dr.
King was arrested, he sent a "Letter from the St. Augustine Jail" to a
northern supporter, Rabbi Israel Dresner. A week later, in the largest
mass arrest of rabbis in American history took place, while they were
conducting a pray-in at the segregated Monson Motel. A well-known
photograph taken in St. Augustine shows the manager of the Monson Motel
pouring muriatic acid in the swimming pool while blacks and whites are
swimming in it. The horrifying photograph was run on the front page of a
Washington newspaper the day the Senate were to vote on passing the
Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Chester School Protests, Spring 1964
====================================

-   *In the early 1960s, racial unrest and civil rights protests led by
    George Raymond of the National Association for the Advancement of
    Colored Persons (NAACP) and Stanley Branche of the Committee for
    Freedom Now (CFFN) made Chester, Pennsylvania one of the key
    battlegrounds of the civil rights movement.*

In the early 1960s, racial unrest and civil rights protests led by
George Raymond of the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored Persons (NAACP) and Stanley Branche of the Committee for Freedom
Now (CFFN) made Chester, Pennsylvania one of the key battlegrounds of
the civil rights movement. James Farmer, the national director of the
Congress of Racial Equality called Chester "the Birmingham of the
North".

In 1962, Branche and the CFFN focused on improving conditions at the
predominantly black Franklin Elementary school in Chester. Although the
school was built to house 500 students, it had become overcrowded with
1,200 students. The school's average class-size was 39, twice the number
of nearby all-white schools. The school was built in 1910 and had never
been updated. Only two bathrooms were available for the entire school.
In November 1963, CFFN protesters blocked the entrance to Franklin
Elementary school and the Chester Municipal Building resulting in the
arrest of 240 protesters. Following public attention to the protests
stoked by media coverage of the mass arrests, the mayor and school board
negotiated with the CFFN and NAACP. The Chester Board of Education
agreed to reduce class sizes at Franklin school, remove unsanitary
toilet facilities, relocate classes held in the boiler room and coal bin
and repair school grounds.

Emboldened by the success of the Franklin Elementary school
demonstrations, the CFFN recruited new members, sponsored voter
registration drives and planned a citywide boycott of Chester schools.
Branche built close ties with students at nearby Swarthmore College,
Pennsylvania Military College and Cheyney State College in order to
ensure large turnouts at demonstrations and protests. Branche invited
Dick Gregory and Malcolm X to Chester to participate in the "Freedom Now
Conference" and other national civil rights leaders such as Gloria
Richardson came to Chester in support of the demonstrations.

In 1964, a series of almost nightly protests brought chaos to Chester as
protestors argued that the Chester School Board had de facto segregation
of schools. The mayor of Chester, James Gorbey, issued "The Police
Position to Preserve the Public Peace", a ten-point statement promising
an immediate return to law and order. The city deputized firemen and
trash collectors to help handle demonstrators. The State of Pennsylvania
deployed 50 state troopers to assist the 77-member Chester police force.
The demonstrations were marked by violence and charges of police
brutality. Over six hundred people were arrested over a two month period
of civil rights rallies, marches, pickets, boycotts and sit-ins.
Pennsylvania Governor William Scranton became involved in the
negotiations and convinced Branche to obey a court-ordered moratorium on
demonstrations. Scranton created the Pennsylvania Human Relations
Commission to conduct hearings on the de facto segregation of public
schools. All protests were discontinued while the commission held
hearings during the summer of 1964.

In November 1964, the Pennsylvania Human Relations Commission concluded
that the Chester School Board had violated the law and ordered the
Chester School District to desegregate the city's six predominantly
African-American schools. The city appealed the ruling, which delayed
implementation.

![](media/image20.jpg){width="3.559870953630796in" height="5.5in"}\
*Missing persons poster created by the FBI in 1964 shows the photographs
of Andrew Goodman, James Chaney, and Michael Schwerner.*

Freedom Summer, 1964
====================

-   *Before Freedom Summer, the national news media had paid little
    attention to the persecution of black voters in the Deep South and
    the dangers endured by black civil rights workers.*

-   *The outrage over these murders helped lead to the passage of the
    Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.*

-   *Though Freedom Summer failed to register many voters, it had a
    significant effect on the course of the civil rights movement.*

In the summer of 1964, COFO brought nearly 1,000 activists to
Mississippi—most of them white college students from the North and
West—to join with local black activists to register voters, teach in
"Freedom Schools," and organize the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
(MFDP).

Many of Mississippi's white residents deeply resented the outsiders and
attempts to change their society. State and local governments, police,
the White Citizens' Council and the Ku Klux Klan used arrests, beatings,
arson, murder, spying, firing, evictions, and other forms of
intimidation and harassment to oppose the project and prevent blacks
from registering to vote or achieving social equality.

On June 21, 1964, three civil rights workers disappeared: James Chaney,
a young black Mississippian and plasterer's apprentice; and two Jewish
activists, Andrew Goodman, a Queens College anthropology student; and
Michael Schwerner, a CORE organizer from Manhattan's Lower East Side.
They were found weeks later, murdered by conspirators who turned out to
be local members of the Klan, some of them members of the Neshoba County
sheriff's department. This outraged the public, leading the U.S. Justice
Department along with the FBI (the latter which had previously avoided
dealing with the issue of segregation and persecution of blacks) to take
action. The outrage over these murders helped lead to the passage of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

From June to August, Freedom Summer activists worked in 38 local
projects scattered across the state, with the largest number
concentrated in the Mississippi Delta region. At least 30 Freedom
Schools, with close to 3,500 students, were established, and 28
community centers set up.

Over the course of the Summer Project, some 17,000 Mississippi blacks
attempted to become registered voters in defiance of the red tape and
forces of white supremacy arrayed against them—only 1,600 (less than
10%) succeeded. But more than 80,000 joined the Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party (MFDP), founded as an alternative political
organization, showing their desire to vote and participate in politics.

Though Freedom Summer failed to register many voters, it had a
significant effect on the course of the civil rights movement. It helped
break down the decades of people's isolation and repression that were
the foundation of the Jim Crow system. Before Freedom Summer, the
national news media had paid little attention to the persecution of
black voters in the Deep South and the dangers endured by black civil
rights workers. The progression of events throughout the South increased
media attention to Mississippi.

The deaths of affluent northern white students and threats to
non-Southerners attracted the full attention of the media spotlight to
the state. Many black activists became embittered, believing the media
valued lives of whites and blacks differently. Perhaps the most
significant effect of Freedom Summer was on the volunteers, almost all
of whom—black and white—still consider it to have been one of the
defining periods of their lives.

![](media/image21.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6830358705161856in"}\
*Lyndon B. Johnson signs the historic Civil Rights Act of 1964.*

Civil Rights Act of 1964
========================

-   *On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which
    banned discrimination based on "race, color, religion, sex or
    national origin" in employment practices and public accommodations.*

-   *Although President Kennedy had proposed civil rights legislation
    and it had support from Northern Congressmen and Senators of both
    parties, Southern Senators blocked the bill by threatening
    filibusters.*

Although President Kennedy had proposed civil rights legislation and it
had support from Northern Congressmen and Senators of both parties,
Southern Senators blocked the bill by threatening filibusters. After
considerable parliamentary maneuvering and 54 days of filibuster on the
floor of the United States Senate, President Johnson got a bill through
the Congress.

On July 2, 1964, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which
banned discrimination based on "race, color, religion, sex or national
origin" in employment practices and public accommodations. The bill
authorized the Attorney General to file lawsuits to enforce the new law.
The law also nullified state and local laws that required such
discrimination.

Harlem riot of 1964
===================

-   *When police shot an unarmed black teenager in Harlem in July 1964,
    tensions escalated out of control.*

-   *Permanent jobs at living wages were still out of reach of many
    young black men.*

-   *Rioting broke out, and Bedford-Stuyvesant, a major black
    neighborhood in Brooklyn erupted next.*

When police shot an unarmed black teenager in Harlem in July 1964,
tensions escalated out of control. Residents were frustrated with racial
inequalities. Rioting broke out, and Bedford-Stuyvesant, a major black
neighborhood in Brooklyn erupted next. That summer, rioting also broke
out in Philadelphia, for similar reasons. The riots were on a much
smaller scale than what would occur in 1965 and later.

Washington responded with a pilot program called Project Uplift.
Thousands of young people in Harlem were given jobs during the summer of
1965. The project was inspired by a report generated by HARYOU called
Youth in the Ghetto. HARYOU was given a major role in organizing the
project, together with the National Urban League and nearly 100 smaller
community organizations. Permanent jobs at living wages were still out
of reach of many young black men.

![](media/image22.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.7095319335083117in"}\
*President Lyndon B. Johnson (center) meets with civil rights leaders
Martin Luther King Jr., Whitney Young, and James Farmer, January 1964*

Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, 1964
==========================================

-   *They had planned a triumphant celebration of the Johnson
    administration's achievements in civil rights, rather than a fight
    over racism within the Democratic Party.*

-   *The 1964 Democratic Party convention disillusioned many within the
    MFDP and the civil rights movement, but it did not destroy the
    MFDP.*

-   *In 1963 COFO held a Freedom Ballot in Mississippi to demonstrate
    the desire of black Mississippians to vote.*

Blacks in Mississippi had been disfranchised by statutory and
constitutional changes since the late 19th century. In 1963 COFO held a
Freedom Ballot in Mississippi to demonstrate the desire of black
Mississippians to vote. More than 80,000 people registered and voted in
the mock election, which pitted an integrated slate of candidates from
the "Freedom Party" against the official state Democratic Party
candidates.

In 1964, organizers launched the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party
(MFDP) to challenge the all-white official party. When Mississippi
voting registrars refused to recognize their candidates, they held their
own primary. They selected Fannie Lou Hamer, Annie Devine, and Victoria
Gray to run for Congress, and a slate of delegates to represent
Mississippi at the 1964 Democratic National Convention.

The presence of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party in Atlantic
City, New Jersey, was inconvenient, however, for the convention
organizers. They had planned a triumphant celebration of the Johnson
administration's achievements in civil rights, rather than a fight over
racism within the Democratic Party. All-white delegations from other
Southern states threatened to walk out if the official slate from
Mississippi was not seated. Johnson was worried about the inroads that
Republican Barry Goldwater's campaign was making in what previously had
been the white Democratic stronghold of the "Solid South", as well as
support that George Wallace had received in the North during the
Democratic primaries.

Johnson could not, however, prevent the MFDP from taking its case to the
Credentials Committee. There Fannie Lou Hamer testified eloquently about
the beatings that she and others endured and the threats they faced for
trying to register to vote. Turning to the television cameras, Hamer
asked, "Is this America?"

Johnson offered the MFDP a "compromise" under which it would receive two
non-voting, at-large seats, while the white delegation sent by the
official Democratic Party would retain its seats. The MFDP angrily
rejected the "compromise."

The MFDP kept up its agitation at the convention after it was denied
official recognition. When all but three of the "regular" Mississippi
delegates left because they refused to pledge allegiance to the party,
the MFDP delegates borrowed passes from sympathetic delegates and took
the seats vacated by the official Mississippi delegates. National party
organizers removed them. When they returned the next day, they found
convention organizers had removed the empty seats that had been there
the day before. They stayed and sang "freedom songs".

The 1964 Democratic Party convention disillusioned many within the MFDP
and the civil rights movement, but it did not destroy the MFDP. The MFDP
became more radical after Atlantic City. It invited Malcolm X to speak
at one of its conventions and opposed the war in Vietnam.

![](media/image23.jpeg){width="5.5in" height="3.7675in"}\
*Police attack non-violent marchers on "Bloody Sunday", the first day of
the Selma to Montgomery marches.*

Selma Voting Rights Movement
============================

-   *With the support of James Forman and other SNCC leaders, activists
    throughout the country committed civil disobedience for Selma,
    particularly in Montgomery and at the White House.*

-   *Among those gassed and beaten was Amelia Boynton Robinson, who was
    at the center of civil rights activity at the time.*

-   *James Reeb, a voting rights supporter.*

SNCC had undertaken an ambitious voter registration program in Selma,
Alabama, in 1963, but by 1965 little headway had been made in the face
of opposition from Selma's sheriff, Jim Clark. After local residents
asked the SCLC for assistance, King came to Selma to lead several
marches, at which he was arrested along with 250 other demonstrators.
The marchers continued to meet violent resistance from police. Jimmie
Lee Jackson, a resident of nearby Marion, was killed by police at a
later march in February 17, 1965. Jackson's death prompted James Bevel,
director of the Selma Movement, to initiate and organize a plan to march
from Selma to Montgomery, the state capital.

On March 7, 1965, acting on Bevel's plan, Hosea Williams of the SCLC and
John Lewis of SNCC led a march of 600 people to walk the 54 miles
(87 km) from Selma to the state capital in Montgomery. Six blocks into
the march, at the Edmund Pettus Bridge where the marchers left the city
and moved into the county, state troopers and local county law
enforcement, some mounted on horseback, attacked the peaceful
demonstrators with billy clubs, tear gas, rubber tubes wrapped in barbed
wire, and bull whips. They drove the marchers back into Selma. Lewis was
knocked unconscious and dragged to safety. At least 16 other marchers
were hospitalized. Among those gassed and beaten was Amelia Boynton
Robinson, who was at the center of civil rights activity at the time.

The national broadcast of the news footage of lawmen attacking
unresisting marchers' seeking to exercise their constitutional right to
vote provoked a national response, and hundreds of people from all over
the country came for a second march. These marchers were turned around
by Dr. King at the last minute so as not to violate a federal
injunction. With the support of James Forman and other SNCC leaders,
activists throughout the country committed civil disobedience for Selma,
particularly in Montgomery and at the White House. The marchers were
able to lift the injunction and obtain protection from federal troops,
permitting them to make the march across Alabama without incident two
weeks later.

The evening of a second march on March 9 to the site of Bloody Sunday,
local whites attacked Rev. James Reeb, a voting rights supporter. He
died of his injuries in a Birmingham hospital March 11. On March 25,
four Klansmen shot and killed Detroit homemaker Viola Liuzzo as she
drove marchers back to Selma at night after the successfully completed
march to Montgomery.

Voting Rights Act of 1965
=========================

-   *In 1966 Sheriff Jim Clark of Selma, Alabama, infamous for using
    cattle prods against civil rights marchers, was up for reelection.*

-   *When Congress passed the Voting Rights Act, only about 100 African
    Americans held elective office, all in northern states.*

-   *Nearly every Black Belt county (where populations were majority
    black) in Alabama had a black sheriff.*

Eight days after the first march, but before the final march, President
Johnson delivered a televised address to support the voting rights bill
he had sent to Congress. In it he stated:

On August 6, Johnson signed the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which
suspended literacy tests and other subjective voter registration tests.
It authorized Federal supervision of voter registration in states and
individual voting districts where such tests were being used and where
African Americans were historically under-represented in voting rolls
compared to the eligible population. African Americans who had been
barred from registering to vote finally had an alternative to taking
suits to local or state courts, which had seldom prosecuted their cases
to success. If discrimination in voter registration occurred, the 1965
act authorized the Attorney General of the United States to send Federal
examiners to replace local registrars.

Within months of the bill's passage, 250,000 new black voters had been
registered, one-third of them by federal examiners. Within four years,
voter registration in the South had more than doubled. In 1965,
Mississippi had the highest black voter turnout at 74% and led the
nation in the number of black public officials elected. In 1969,
Tennessee had a 92.1% turnout among black voters; Arkansas, 77.9%; and
Texas, 73.1%.

Several whites who had opposed the Voting Rights Act paid a quick price.
In 1966 Sheriff Jim Clark of Selma, Alabama, infamous for using cattle
prods against civil rights marchers, was up for reelection. Although he
took off the notorious "Never" pin on his uniform, he was defeated. At
the election, Clark lost as blacks voted to get him out of office.

Blacks' regaining the power to vote changed the political landscape of
the South. When Congress passed the Voting Rights Act, only about 100
African Americans held elective office, all in northern states. By 1989,
there were more than 7,200 African Americans in office, including more
than 4,800 in the South. Nearly every Black Belt county (where
populations were majority black) in Alabama had a black sheriff.
Southern blacks held top positions in city, county, and state
governments.

Atlanta elected a black mayor, Andrew Young, as did Jackson,
Mississippi, with Harvey Johnson Jr., and New Orleans, with Ernest
Morial. Black politicians on the national level included Barbara Jordan,
elected as a Representative from Texas in Congress, and President Jimmy
Carter appointed Andrew Young as United States Ambassador to the United
Nations. Julian Bond was elected to the Georgia State Legislature in
1965, although political reaction to his public opposition to the U.S.
involvement in the Vietnam War prevented him from taking his seat until
1967. John Lewis was first elected in 1986 to represent Georgia's 5th
congressional district in the United States House of Representatives,
where he has served since 1987.

![](media/image24.jpg){width="4.715333552055993in" height="5.5in"}\
*Police arrest a man during the Watts Riots, August 1965*

Watts riot of 1965
==================

-   *Its residents confronted a largely white police department that had
    a history of abuse against blacks.*

-   *The new Voting Rights Act of 1965 had no immediate effect on living
    conditions for poor blacks.*

-   *With black militancy on the rise, ghetto residents directed acts of
    anger at the police.*

-   *Black residents growing tired of police brutality continued to
    riot.*

The new Voting Rights Act of 1965 had no immediate effect on living
conditions for poor blacks. A few days after the act became law, a riot
broke out in the South Central Los Angeles neighborhood of Watts. Like
Harlem, Watts was a majority-black neighborhood with very high
unemployment and associated poverty. Its residents confronted a largely
white police department that had a history of abuse against blacks.

While arresting a young man for drunk driving, police officers argued
with the suspect's mother before onlookers. The spark triggered a
massive destruction of property through six days of rioting. Thirty-four
people were killed and property valued at about \$30 million was
destroyed, making the Watts Riots among the most expensive in American
history.

With black militancy on the rise, ghetto residents directed acts of
anger at the police. Black residents growing tired of police brutality
continued to riot. Some young people joined groups such as the Black
Panthers, whose popularity was based in part on their reputation for
confronting police officers. Riots among blacks occurred in 1966 and
1967 in cities such as Atlanta, San Francisco, Oakland, Baltimore,
Seattle, Tacoma, Cleveland, Cincinnati, Columbus, Newark, Chicago, New
York City (specifically in Brooklyn, Harlem and the Bronx), and worst of
all in Detroit.

Fair housing movements, 1966–1968
=================================

-   *A proposed "Civil Rights Act of 1966" had collapsed completely
    because of its fair housing provision.*

-   *The Fair Housing Bill was the most contentious civil rights
    legislation of the era.*

The first major blow against housing segregation in the era, the Rumford
Fair Housing Act, was passed in California in 1963. It was overturned by
white California voters and real estate lobbyists the following year
with Proposition 14, a move which helped precipitate the Watts Riots. In
1966, the California Supreme Court invalidated Proposition 14 and
reinstated the Fair Housing Act.

Working and organizing for fair housing laws became a major project of
the movement over the next two years, with Martin Luther King Jr., James
Bevel, and Al Raby leading the Chicago Freedom Movement around the issue
in 1966. In the following year, Father James Groppi and the NAACP Youth
Council also attracted national attention with a fair housing campaign
in Milwaukee. Both movements faced violent resistance from white
homeowners and legal opposition from conservative politicians.

The Fair Housing Bill was the most contentious civil rights legislation
of the era. Senator Walter Mondale, who advocated for the bill, noted
that over successive years, it was the most filibustered legislation in
U.S. history. It was opposed by most Northern and Southern senators, as
well as the National Association of Real Estate Boards. A proposed
"Civil Rights Act of 1966" had collapsed completely because of its fair
housing provision. Mondale commented that:

Nationwide riots of 1967
========================

-   *President Johnson created the National Advisory Commission on Civil
    Disorders in response to nationwide wave of riots.*

-   *Residents reported that police officers and National Guardsmen shot
    at black civilians and suspects indiscriminately.*

-   *It warned that the United States was moving toward separate white
    and black societies.*

In 1967 riots broke out in black neighborhoods in more than 100 U.S.
cities, including Detroit, Newark, Cincinnati, Cleveland, and
Washington, D.C. The largest of these was the 1967 Detroit riot.

In Detroit, a large black middle class had begun to develop among those
African Americans who worked at unionized jobs in the automotive
industry. These workers complained of persisting racist practices,
limiting the jobs they could have and opportunities for promotion. The
United Auto Workers channelled these complaints into bureaucratic and
ineffective grievance procedures. Violent white mobs enforced the
segregation of housing up through the 1960s. Blacks who were not
upwardly mobile were living in substandard conditions, subject to the
same problems as poor African Americans in Watts and Harlem.

When white Detroit Police Department (DPD) officers shut down an illegal
bar and arrested a large group of patrons during the hot summer, furious
black residents rioted. Rioters looted and destroyed property while
snipers engaged in firefights from rooftops and windows, undermining the
DPD's ability to curtail the disorder. In response, the Michigan Army
National Guard and U.S. Army paratroopers were deployed to reinforce the
DPD and protect Detroit Fire Department (DFD) firefighters from attacks
while putting out fires. Residents reported that police officers and
National Guardsmen shot at black civilians and suspects
indiscriminately. After five days, 43 people had been killed, hundreds
injured, and thousands left homeless; \$40 to \$45 million worth of
damage was caused.

State and local governments responded to the riot with a dramatic
increase in minority hiring. In the aftermath of the turmoil, the
Greater Detroit Board of Commerce also launched a campaign to find jobs
for ten thousand "previously unemployable" persons, a preponderant
number of whom were black. Governor George Romney immediately responded
to the riot of 1967 with a special session of the Michigan legislature
where he forwarded sweeping housing proposals that included not only
fair housing, but "important relocation, tenants' rights and code
enforcement legislation." Romney had supported such proposals in 1965,
but abandoned them in the face of organized opposition. The laws passed
both houses of the legislature. Historian Sidney Fine wrote that:

President Johnson created the National Advisory Commission on Civil
Disorders in response to nationwide wave of riots. The commission's
final report called for major reforms in employment and public policy in
black communities. It warned that the United States was moving toward
separate white and black societies.

Memphis, King assassination and the Poor People's March 1968
============================================================

-   *Ralph Abernathy succeeded King as the head of the SCLC and
    attempted to carry forth King's plan for a Poor People's March.*

-   *The day before King's funeral, April 8, Coretta Scott King and
    three of the King children led 20,000 marchers through the streets
    of Memphis, holding signs that read, "Honor King: End Racism" and
    "Union Justice Now".*

Rev. James Lawson invited King to Memphis, Tennessee, in March 1968 to
support a sanitation workers' strike. These workers launched a campaign
for union representation after two workers were accidentally killed on
the job; they were seeking fair wages and improved working conditions.
King considered their struggle to be a vital part of the Poor People's
Campaign he was planning.

A day after delivering his stirring "I've Been to the Mountaintop"
sermon, which has become famous for his vision of American society, King
was assassinated on April 4, 1968. Riots broke out in black
neighborhoods in more than 110 cities across the United States in the
days that followed, notably in Chicago, Baltimore, and Washington, D.C.

The day before King's funeral, April 8, Coretta Scott King and three of
the King children led 20,000 marchers through the streets of Memphis,
holding signs that read, "Honor King: End Racism" and "Union Justice
Now". Armed National Guardsmen lined the streets, sitting on M-48 tanks,
to protect the marchers, and helicopters circled overhead. On April 9,
Mrs. King led another 150,000 people in a funeral procession through the
streets of Atlanta. Her dignity revived courage and hope in many of the
Movement's members, confirming her place as the new leader in the
struggle for racial equality.

Coretta Scott King said,

Rev. Ralph Abernathy succeeded King as the head of the SCLC and
attempted to carry forth King's plan for a Poor People's March. It was
to unite blacks and whites to campaign for fundamental changes in
American society and economic structure. The march went forward under
Abernathy's plainspoken leadership but did not achieve its goals.

Civil Rights Act of 1968
========================

-   *As the House of Representatives deliberated the bill in April, Dr.
    King was assassinated, and the largest wave of unrest since the
    Civil War swept the country.*

-   *The Civil Rights Act of 1968 prohibited discrimination concerning
    the sale, rental, and financing of housing based on race, religion,
    and national origin.*

As 1968 began, the fair housing bill was being filibustered once again,
but two developments revived it. The Kerner Commission report on the
1967 ghetto riots was delivered to Congress on March 1, and it strongly
recommended "a comprehensive and enforceable federal open housing law"
as a remedy to the civil disturbances. The Senate was moved to end their
filibuster that week.

As the House of Representatives deliberated the bill in April, Dr. King
was assassinated, and the largest wave of unrest since the Civil War
swept the country. Senator Charles Mathias wrote that:

The House passed the legislation on April 10, and President Johnson
signed it the next day. The Civil Rights Act of 1968 prohibited
discrimination concerning the sale, rental, and financing of housing
based on race, religion, and national origin. It also made it a federal
crime to "by force or by threat of force, injure, intimidate, or
interfere with anyone...by reason of their race, color, religion, or
national origin."

Movements, politics, and white reactions
========================================

![](media/image25.jpg){width="3.6520002187226597in" height="5.5in"}\
*Fannie Lou Hamer of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party (and other
Mississippi-based organizations) is an example of local grassroots
leadership in the movement.*

Grassroots leadership
=====================

-   *Sociologist Doug McAdam has stated that, "in King's case, it would
    be inaccurate to say that he was the leader of the modern civil
    rights movement...but more importantly, there was no singular civil
    rights movement.*

While most popular representations of the movement are centered on the
leadership and philosophy of Martin Luther King Jr., some scholars note
that the movement was too diverse to be credited to one person,
organization, or strategy. Sociologist Doug McAdam has stated that, "in
King's case, it would be inaccurate to say that he was the leader of the
modern civil rights movement...but more importantly, there was no
singular civil rights movement. The movement was, in fact, a coalition
of thousands of local efforts nationwide, spanning several decades,
hundreds of discrete groups, and all manner of strategies and
tactics—legal, illegal, institutional, non-institutional, violent,
non-violent. Without discounting King's importance, it would be sheer
fiction to call him the leader of what was fundamentally an amorphous,
fluid, dispersed movement." Decentralized grassroots leadership has been
a major focus of movement scholarship in recent decades through the work
of historians John Dittmer, Charles Payne, Barbara Ransby, and others.

![](media/image26.jpg){width="3.9233333333333333in" height="5.5in"}\
*Gold medalist Tommie Smith (center) and bronze medalist John Carlos
(right) showing the raised fist on the podium after the 200 m race at
the 1968 Summer Olympics; both wear Olympic Project for Human Rights
badges. Peter Norman (silver medalist, left) from Australia also wears
an OPHR badge in solidarity with Smith and Carlos.*

Black power (1966–1968)
=======================

-   *During the Freedom Summer campaign of 1964, numerous tensions
    within the civil rights movement came to the forefront.*

-   *Some people engaging in the Black Power movement claimed a growing
    sense of black pride and identity.*

-   *King was not comfortable with the "Black Power" slogan, which
    sounded too much like black nationalism to him.*

During the Freedom Summer campaign of 1964, numerous tensions within the
civil rights movement came to the forefront. Many blacks in SNCC
developed concerns that white activists from the North and West were
taking over the movement. The participation by numerous white students
was not reducing the amount of violence that SNCC suffered, but seemed
to exacerbate it. Additionally, there was profound disillusionment at
Lyndon Johnson's denial of voting status for the Mississippi Freedom
Democratic Party at the Democratic National Convention. Meanwhile,
during CORE's work in Louisiana that summer, that group found the
federal government would not respond to requests to enforce the
provisions of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, or to protect the lives of
activists who challenged segregation. The Louisiana campaign survived by
relying on a local African-American militia called the Deacons for
Defense and Justice, who used arms to repel white supremacist violence
and police repression. CORE's collaboration with the Deacons was
effective in disrupting Jim Crow in numerous Louisiana areas.

In 1965, SNCC helped organize an independent political party, the
Lowndes County Freedom Organization (LCFO), in the heart of the Alabama
Black Belt, also Klan territory. It permitted its black leaders to
openly promote the use of armed self-defense. Meanwhile, the Deacons for
Defense and Justice expanded into Mississippi and assisted Charles
Evers' NAACP chapter with a successful campaign in Natchez. Charles had
taken the lead after his brother Medgar Evers was assassinated in 1963.
The same year, the 1965 Watts Rebellion took place in Los Angeles. Many
black youth were committed to the use of violence to protest inequality
and oppression.

During the March Against Fear in 1966, initiated by James Meredith, SNCC
and CORE fully embraced the slogan of "black power" to describe these
trends towards militancy and self-reliance. In Mississippi, Stokely
Carmichael declared, "I'm not going to beg the white man for anything
that I deserve, I'm going to take it. We need power."

Some people engaging in the Black Power movement claimed a growing sense
of black pride and identity. In gaining more of a sense of a cultural
identity, blacks demanded that whites no longer refer to them as
"Negroes" but as "Afro-Americans," similar to other ethnic groups, such
as Irish Americans and Italian Americans. Until the mid-1960s, blacks
had dressed similarly to whites and often straightened their hair. As a
part of affirming their identity, blacks started to wear African-based
dashikis and grow their hair out as a natural afro. The afro, sometimes
nicknamed the "'fro," remained a popular black hairstyle until the late
1970s. Other variations of traditional African styles have become
popular, often featuring braids, extensions, and dreadlocks.

The Black Panther Party (BPP), which was founded by Huey Newton and
Bobby Seale in Oakland, California, in 1966, gained the most attention
for Black Power nationally. The group began following the revolutionary
pan-Africanism of late-period Malcolm X, using a "by-any-means
necessary" approach to stopping racial inequality. They sought to rid
African-American neighborhoods of police brutality and to establish
socialist community control in the ghettos. While they conducted armed
confrontation with police, they also set up free breakfast and
healthcare programs for children. Between 1968 and 1971, the BPP was one
of the most important black organizations in the country and had support
from the NAACP, SCLC, Peace and Freedom Party, and others.

Black Power was taken to another level inside prison walls. In 1966,
George Jackson formed the Black Guerrilla Family in the California San
Quentin State Prison. The goal of this group was to overthrow the
white-run government in America and the prison system. In 1970, this
group displayed their dedication after a white prison guard was found
not guilty of shooting and killing three black prisoners from the prison
tower. They retaliated by killing a white prison guard.

Numerous popular cultural expressions associated with black power
appeared at this time. Released in August 1968, the number one Rhythm &
Blues single for the Billboard Year-End list was James Brown's "Say It
Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud". In October 1968, Tommie Smith and John
Carlos, while being awarded the gold and bronze medals, respectively, at
the 1968 Summer Olympics, donned human rights badges and each raised a
black-gloved Black Power salute during their podium ceremony.

King was not comfortable with the "Black Power" slogan, which sounded
too much like black nationalism to him. When King was assassinated in
1968, Stokely Carmichael said that whites had murdered the one person
who would prevent rampant rioting and that blacks would burn every major
city to the ground. Riots broke out in more than 100 cities across the
country. Some cities did not recover from the damage for more than a
generation; other city neighborhoods never recovered.

Black conservatism
==================

-   *For them, they took issue with different parts of the civil rights
    movement and the potential for blacks to exercise consumerism and
    economic liberty without hindrance from whites.*

-   *Despite the common notion that the ideas of Martin Luther King Jr.,
    Malcolm X and Black Power only conflicted with each other and were
    the only ideologies of the civil rights movement, there were other
    sentiments felt by many blacks.*

Despite the common notion that the ideas of Martin Luther King Jr.,
Malcolm X and Black Power only conflicted with each other and were the
only ideologies of the civil rights movement, there were other
sentiments felt by many blacks. Fearing the events during the movement
were occurring too quickly, there were some blacks who felt that leaders
should take their activism at a slower pace. Others had reservations on
how focused blacks were on the movement and felt that such attention was
better spent on reforming issues within the black community.

Those who blatantly rejected integration had various rationales for
doing so, such as fearing a change in the status quo they had been used
to for so long or fearing for their safety if they found themselves in
environments where whites were much more present. Some defended
segregation for the sake of keeping ties with the white power structure
from which many relied on for social and economic mobility above other
blacks. Based on her interpretation of a 1966 study made by Donald
Matthews and James Prothro detailing the relative percentage of blacks
for integration, against it or feeling something else, Lauren Winner
asserts that:

Oftentimes, African-American community leaders would be staunch
defenders of segregation. Church ministers, businessmen and educators
were among those who wished to keep segregation and segregationist
ideals in order to retain the privileges they gained from patronage from
whites, such as monetary gains. In addition, they relied on segregation
to keep their jobs and economies in their communities thriving. It was
feared that if integration became widespread in the South, black-owned
businesses and other establishments would lose a large chunk of their
customer base to white-owned businesses, and many blacks would lose
opportunities for jobs that were presently exclusive to their interests.
On the other hand, there were the everyday, average black people who
criticized integration as well. For them, they took issue with different
parts of the civil rights movement and the potential for blacks to
exercise consumerism and economic liberty without hindrance from whites.

For Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and other leading activists and
groups during the movement, these opposing viewpoints acted as an
obstacle against their ideas. These different views made such leaders'
work much harder to accomplish, but they were nonetheless important in
the overall scope of the movement. For the most part, the black
individuals who had reservations on various aspects of the movement and
ideologies of the activists were not able to make a game-changing dent
in their efforts, but the existence of these alternate ideas gave some
blacks an outlet to express their concerns about the changing social
structure.

Avoiding the "Communist" label
==============================

-   *In order to secure a place in the mainstream and gain the broadest
    base, the new generation of civil rights activists believed they had
    to openly distance themselves from anything and anyone associated
    with the Communist party.*

-   *As earlier civil rights figures such as Robeson, Du Bois and
    Patterson became more politically radical (and therefore targets of
    Cold War anti-Communism by the U.S. Government), they lost favor
    with both mainstream Black America and the NAACP.*

On December 17, 1951, the Communist Party–affiliated Civil Rights
Congress delivered the petition We Charge Genocide: "The Crime of
Government Against the Negro People", often shortened to We Charge
Genocide, to the United Nations in 1951, arguing that the U.S. federal
government, by its failure to act against lynching in the United States,
was guilty of genocide under Article II of the UN Genocide Convention.
The petition was presented to the United Nations at two separate venues:
Paul Robeson, concert singer and activist, to a UN official in New York
City, while William L. Patterson, executive director of the CRC,
delivered copies of the drafted petition to a UN delegation in Paris.

Patterson, the editor of the petition, was a leader in the Communist
Party USA and head of the International Labor Defense, a group that
offered legal representation to communists, trade unionists, and African
Americans in cases involving issues of political or racial persecution.
The ILD was known for leading the defense of the Scottsboro boys in
Alabama in 1931, where the Communist Party had considerable influence
among African Americans in the 1930s. This had largely declined by the
late 1950s, although they could command international attention. As
earlier civil rights figures such as Robeson, Du Bois and Patterson
became more politically radical (and therefore targets of Cold War
anti-Communism by the U.S. Government), they lost favor with both
mainstream Black America and the NAACP.

In order to secure a place in the mainstream and gain the broadest base,
the new generation of civil rights activists believed they had to openly
distance themselves from anything and anyone associated with the
Communist party. According to Ella Baker, the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference adopted "Christian" into its name to deter charges
of Communism. The FBI under J. Edgar Hoover had been concerned about
communism since the early 20th century, and continued to label as
"Communist" or "subversive" some of the civil rights activists, whom it
kept under close surveillance. In the early 1960s, the practice of
distancing the civil rights movement from "Reds" was challenged by the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee who adopted a policy of
accepting assistance and participation by anyone, regardless of
political affiliation, who supported the SNCC program and was willing to
"put their body on the line." At times this political openness put SNCC
at odds with the NAACP.

![](media/image27.jpg){width="3.615333552055993in" height="5.5in"}\
*Attorney General Robert Kennedy speaking before a hostile Civil Rights
crowd protesting low minority hiring in his Justice Department June 14,
1963*

Kennedy administration, 1961–1963
=================================

-   *The president came to share his brother's sense of urgency on the
    matter, resulting in the landmark Civil Rights Address of June 1963
    and the introduction of the first major civil rights act of the
    decade.*

-   *The Freedom Riders documentary notes that, "The back burner issue
    of civil rights had collided with the urgent demands of Cold War
    realpolitik."*

For the first two years of the Kennedy administration, civil rights
activists had mixed opinions of both the president and attorney general,
Robert F. Kennedy. A well of historical skepticism toward liberal
politics had left African Americans with a sense of uneasy disdain for
any white politician who claimed to share their concerns for freedom,
particularly ones connected to the historically pro-segregationist
Democratic Party. Still, many were encouraged by the discreet support
Kennedy gave to Dr. King, and the administration's willingness, after
dramatic pressure from civil disobedience, to bring forth racially
progressive initiatives.

Many of the initiatives resulted from Robert Kennedy's passion. The
younger Kennedy gained a rapid education in the realities of racism
through events such as the Baldwin-Kennedy meeting. The president came
to share his brother's sense of urgency on the matter, resulting in the
landmark Civil Rights Address of June 1963 and the introduction of the
first major civil rights act of the decade.

Robert Kennedy first became concerned with civil rights in mid-May 1961
during the Freedom Rides, when photographs of the burning bus and savage
beatings in Anniston and Birmingham were broadcast around the world.
They came at an especially embarrassing time, as President Kennedy was
about to have a summit with the Soviet premier in Vienna. The White
House was concerned with its image among the populations of newly
independent nations in Africa and Asia, and Robert Kennedy responded
with an address for Voice of America stating that great progress had
been made on the issue of race relations. Meanwhile, behind the scenes,
the administration worked to resolve the crisis with a minimum of
violence and prevent the Freedom Riders from generating a fresh crop of
headlines that might divert attention from the President's international
agenda. The Freedom Riders documentary notes that, "The back burner
issue of civil rights had collided with the urgent demands of Cold War
realpolitik."

On May 21, when a white mob attacked and burned the First Baptist Church
in Montgomery, Alabama, where King was holding out with protesters,
Robert Kennedy telephoned King to ask him to stay in the building until
the U.S. Marshals and National Guard could secure the area. King
proceeded to berate Kennedy for "allowing the situation to continue".
King later publicly thanked Kennedy for deploying the force to break up
an attack which might otherwise have ended King's life.

With a very small majority in Congress, the president's ability to press
ahead with legislation relied considerably on a balancing game with the
Senators and Congressmen of the South. Without the support of
Vice-President Johnson, a former Senator who had years of experience in
Congress and longstanding relations there, many of the
Attorney-General's programs would not have progressed.

By late 1962, frustration at the slow pace of political change was
balanced by the movement's strong support for legislative initiatives,
including administrative representation across all U.S. Government
departments and greater access to the ballot box. From squaring off
against Governor George Wallace, to "tearing into" Vice-President
Johnson (for failing to desegregate areas of the administration), to
threatening corrupt white Southern judges with disbarment, to
desegregating interstate transport, Robert Kennedy came to be consumed
by the civil rights movement. He continued to work on these social
justice issues in his bid for the presidency in 1968.

On the night of Governor Wallace's capitulation to African-American
enrollment at the University of Alabama, President Kennedy gave an
address to the nation, which marked the changing tide, an address that
was to become a landmark for the ensuing change in political policy as
to civil rights. In 1966, Robert Kennedy visited South Africa and voiced
his objections to apartheid, the first time a major US politician had
done so:

Robert Kennedy's relationship with the movement was not always positive.
As attorney general, he was called to account by activists—who booed him
at a June 1963 speech—for the Justice Department's own poor record of
hiring blacks. He also presided over FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover and
his COINTELPRO program. This program ordered FBI agents to "expose,
disrupt, misdirect, discredit, or otherwise neutralize" the activities
of Communist front groups, a category in which the paranoid Hoover
included most civil rights organizations. Kennedy personally authorized
some of the programs. According to Tim Weiner, "RFK knew much more about
this surveillance than he ever admitted." Although Kennedy only gave
approval for limited wiretapping of Dr. King's phones "on a trial basis,
for a month or so." Hoover extended the clearance so his men were
"unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of the black leader's
life they deemed important;they then used this information to harass
King. Kennedy directly ordered surveillance on James Baldwin after their
antagonistic racial summit in 1963.

![](media/image28.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.355860673665791in"}\
*Jewish civil rights activist Joseph L. Rauh Jr. marching with Martin
Luther King in 1963*

American Jewish community and the civil rights movement
=======================================================

-   *While Jews were very active in the civil rights movement in the
    South, in the North, many had experienced a more strained
    relationship with African Americans.*

-   *Many in the Jewish community supported the civil rights movement.*

-   *The American Jewish Committee, American Jewish Congress, and
    Anti-Defamation League (ADL) actively promoted civil rights.*

Many in the Jewish community supported the civil rights movement. In
fact, statistically Jews were one of the most actively involved
non-black groups in the Movement. Many Jewish students worked in concert
with African Americans for CORE, SCLC, and SNCC as full-time organizers
and summer volunteers during the Civil Rights era. Jews made up roughly
half of the white northern and western volunteers involved in the 1964
Mississippi Freedom Summer project and approximately half of the civil
rights attorneys active in the South during the 1960s.

Jewish leaders were arrested while heeding a call from Martin Luther
King Jr. in St. Augustine, Florida, in June 1964, where the largest mass
arrest of rabbis in American history took place at the Monson Motor
Lodge—a nationally important civil rights landmark that was demolished
in 2003 so that a Hilton Hotel could be built on the site. Abraham
Joshua Heschel, a writer, rabbi, and professor of theology at the Jewish
Theological Seminary of America in New York, was outspoken on the
subject of civil rights. He marched arm-in-arm with Dr. King in the 1965
Selma to Montgomery march. In the 1964 murders of Chaney, Goodman, and
Schwerner, the two white activists killed, Andrew Goodman and Michael
Schwerner, were both Jewish.

Brandeis University, the only nonsectarian Jewish-sponsored college
university in the world, created the Transitional Year Program (TYP) in
1968, in part response to Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King's assassination.
The faculty created it to renew the university's commitment to social
justice. Recognizing Brandeis as a university with a commitment to
academic excellence, these faculty members created a chance to
disadvantaged students to participate in an empowering educational
experience.

The American Jewish Committee, American Jewish Congress, and
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) actively promoted civil rights. While Jews
were very active in the civil rights movement in the South, in the
North, many had experienced a more strained relationship with African
Americans. In communities experiencing white flight, racial rioting, and
urban decay, Jewish Americans were more often the last remaining whites
in the communities most affected.\[citation needed\] It has been argued
that with Black militancy and the Black Power movements on the rise,
"Black Anti-Semitism" increased leading to strained relations between
Blacks and Jews in Northern communities. In New York City, most notably,
there was a major socio-economic class difference in the perception of
African Americans by Jews. Jews from better educated Upper Middle Class
backgrounds were often very supportive of African American civil rights
activities while the Jews in poorer urban communities that became
increasingly minority were often less supportive largely in part due to
more negative and violent interactions between the two groups.

According to political scientist Michael Rogin, Jewish-Black hostility
was a two-way street extending to earlier decades. In the post-World War
II era, Jews were granted white privilege and most moved into the
middle-class while Blacks were left behind in the ghetto. Urban Jews
engaged in the same sort of conflicts with Blacks—over integration
busing, local control of schools, housing, crime, communal identity, and
class divides—that other white ethnics did, leading to Jews
participating in white flight. The culmination of this was the 1968 New
York City teachers' strike, pitting largely Jewish schoolteachers
against predominantly Black parents in Brownsville, New York.

Profile
=======

-   *Many Jewish individuals in the Southern states who supported civil
    rights for African Americans tended to keep a low profile on "the
    race issue", in order to avoid attracting the attention of the
    anti-Black and antisemitic Ku Klux Klan.*

Many Jewish individuals in the Southern states who supported civil
rights for African Americans tended to keep a low profile on "the race
issue", in order to avoid attracting the attention of the anti-Black and
antisemitic Ku Klux Klan. However, Klan groups exploited the issue of
African-American integration and Jewish involvement in the struggle to
launch acts of violent antisemitism. As an example of this hatred, in
one year alone, from November 1957 to October 1958, temples and other
Jewish communal gatherings were bombed and desecrated in Atlanta,
Nashville, Jacksonville, and Miami, and dynamite was found under
synagogues in Birmingham, Charlotte, and Gastonia, North Carolina. Some
rabbis received death threats, but there were no injuries following
these outbursts of violence.

White backlash
==============

-   *He believed change was needed beyond the civil rights gained by the
    movement.*

-   *King's attempts to broaden the scope of the civil rights movement
    were halting and largely unsuccessful, however.*

-   *The liberal coalition that had gained passage of the Civil Rights
    Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 began to fray.*

King reached the height of popular acclaim during his life in 1964, when
he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. His career after that point was
filled with frustrating challenges. The liberal coalition that had
gained passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act
of 1965 began to fray.

King was becoming more estranged from the Johnson administration. In
1965 he broke with it by calling for peace negotiations and a halt to
the bombing of Vietnam. He moved further left in the following years,
speaking of the need for economic justice and thoroughgoing changes in
American society. He believed change was needed beyond the civil rights
gained by the movement.

King's attempts to broaden the scope of the civil rights movement were
halting and largely unsuccessful, however. King made several efforts in
1965 to take the Movement north to address housing discrimination.
SCLC's campaign in Chicago publicly failed, as Chicago Mayor Richard J.
Daley marginalized SCLC's campaign by promising to "study" the city's
problems. In 1966, white demonstrators holding "white power" signs in
notoriously racist Cicero, a suburb of Chicago, threw stones at marchers
demonstrating against housing segregation.

Politicians and journalists quickly blamed this white backlash on the
movement's shift towards Black Power in the mid-1960s; today most
scholars view backlash as a phenomenon that was already developing in
the mid-1950s, embodied in the "massive resistance" movement of the
South where even the few moderate white leaders (including George
Wallace, who had once been endorsed by the NAACP) shifted to openly
racist positions. Northern and Western racists opposed the southerners
on a regional and cultural basis, but also held segregationist attitudes
which became more pronounced as the civil rights movement headed north
and west. For instance, prior to the Watts riot, California whites had
already mobilized to repeal the state's 1963 fair housing law.

Even so, the backlash was not sufficient at the time to roll back major
civil rights victories or swing the country into reaction. Social
historians Matthew Lassiter and Barbara Ehrenreich note that backlash's
primary constituency was suburban and middle-class, but not
working-class whites: "among the white electorate, one half of
blue-collar voters…cast their ballot for \[the liberal presidential
candidate\] Hubert Humphrey in 1968…only in the South did George Wallace
draw substantially more blue-collar than white-collar support."

African-American women in the movement
======================================

-   *Women were members of the NAACP because they believed it could help
    them contribute to the cause of civil rights.*

-   *Women often acted as leaders in the civil rights movement and led
    organizations that contributed to the cause of civil rights.*

Women often acted as leaders in the civil rights movement and led
organizations that contributed to the cause of civil rights.
African-American women stepped into the roles that men had previously
held. Women were members of the NAACP because they believed it could
help them contribute to the cause of civil rights. Women involved with
the Black Panthers would lead meetings, edit the Black Panther
newspaper, and advocated for childcare and sexual freedom. Women
involved with SNCC helped to organize sit-ins and the Freedom Rides, as
well as keeping the organization together. Women also formed church
groups, bridge clubs, and professional organizations, such as the
National Council of Negro Women, to help achieve freedom for themselves
and their race. Some women who participated in these organizations lost
their jobs because of their involvement.

Discrimination
==============

-   *Women who worked in multiple civil rights organizations noted that
    males tended to become the leaders and women "faded into the
    background" and the men of the movement did not acknowledge the
    gender discrimination present in the organization.*

-   *Women got very little recognition for their roles in the civil
    rights movement despite the fact that they were heavily involved
    with the participation and planning.*

Many women in the movement experienced gender discrimination and sexual
harassment within the movement. In the SCLC, Ella Baker's input was
discouraged in spite of her being the oldest and most experienced person
on the staff. Within the ministers' patriarchal hierarchy, age and
experience were actually considered detriments for a woman. Her role as
an executive was only assigned as a placeholder for a male leader. Women
that worked under SNCC did the clerical work and were not consistently
given leadership positions. Women who worked in multiple civil rights
organizations noted that males tended to become the leaders and women
"faded into the background" and the men of the movement did not
acknowledge the gender discrimination present in the organization. Much
of the reasoning for the lesser role that women took in the movement was
that it was time for black men to take on a role as a leader now that
they had the opportunity. Women got very little recognition for their
roles in the civil rights movement despite the fact that they were
heavily involved with the participation and planning.

Long-run impact
===============

-   *The study found that "whites from counties that experienced
    historical civil rights protests are more likely to identify as
    Democrats and support affirmative action, and less likely to harbor
    racial resentment against blacks... counties that experienced civil
    rights protests are associated with greater Democratic Party vote
    shares even today."*

-   *A 2018 study in the American Journal of Political Science found
    that civil rights protest activity had a meaningful persistent
    impact on attitudes in the long-run.*

A 2018 study in the American Journal of Political Science found that
civil rights protest activity had a meaningful persistent impact on
attitudes in the long-run. The study found that "whites from counties
that experienced historical civil rights protests are more likely to
identify as Democrats and support affirmative action, and less likely to
harbor racial resentment against blacks... counties that experienced
civil rights protests are associated with greater Democratic Party vote
shares even today."

Johnson administration: 1963–1968
=================================

-   *With the civil rights movement at full blast, Lyndon Johnson
    coupled black entrepreneurship with his war on poverty, setting up
    special program in the Small Business Administration, the Office of
    Economic Opportunity, and other agencies.*

-   *Lyndon Johnson made civil rights one of his highest priorities,
    coupling it with a whites war on poverty.*

-   *Under Kennedy, major civil rights legislation had been stalled in
    Congress.*

Lyndon Johnson made civil rights one of his highest priorities, coupling
it with a whites war on poverty. However in creasing the shrill
opposition to the War in Vietnam, coupled with the cost of the war,
undercut support for his domestic programs.

Under Kennedy, major civil rights legislation had been stalled in
Congress. His assassination changed everything. On one hand president
Lyndon Johnson was a much more skillful negotiator than Kennedy but he
had behind him a powerful national momentum demanding immediate action
on moral and emotional grounds. Demands for immediate action originated
from unexpected directions, especially white Protestant church groups.
The Justice Department, led by Robert Kennedy, moved from a posture of
defending Kennedy from the quagmire minefield of racial politics to
acting to fulfill his legacy. The violent death and public reaction
dramatically moved the moderate Republicans, led by Senator Everett
McKinley Dirksen, whose support was the margin of victory for the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. The act immediately ended de jure (legal)
segregation and the era of Jim Crow.

With the civil rights movement at full blast, Lyndon Johnson coupled
black entrepreneurship with his war on poverty, setting up special
program in the Small Business Administration, the Office of Economic
Opportunity, and other agencies. This time there was money for loans
designed to boost minority business ownership. Richard Nixon greatly
expanded the program, setting up the Office of Minority Business
Enterprise (OMBE) in the expectation that black entrepreneurs would help
defuse racial tensions and possibly support his reelection .

Prison reform
=============

Gates v. Collier
================

-   *Federal Judge William C. Keady found in favor of the inmates,
    writing that Parchman Farm violated the civil rights of the inmates
    by inflicting cruel and unusual punishment.*

-   *In 1970 the civil rights lawyer Roy Haber began taking statements
    from inmates.*

-   *Conditions at the Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman, then
    known as Parchman Farm, became part of the public discussion of
    civil rights after activists were imprisoned there.*

Conditions at the Mississippi State Penitentiary at Parchman, then known
as Parchman Farm, became part of the public discussion of civil rights
after activists were imprisoned there. In the spring of 1961, Freedom
Riders came to the South to test the desegregation of public facilities.
By the end of June 1963, Freedom Riders had been convicted in Jackson,
Mississippi. Many were jailed in Mississippi State Penitentiary at
Parchman. Mississippi employed the trusty system, a hierarchical order
of inmates that used some inmates to control and enforce punishment of
other inmates.

In 1970 the civil rights lawyer Roy Haber began taking statements from
inmates. He collected 50 pages of details of murders, rapes, beatings
and other abuses suffered by the inmates from 1969 to 1971 at
Mississippi State Penitentiary. In a landmark case known as Gates v.
Collier (1972), four inmates represented by Haber sued the
superintendent of Parchman Farm for violating their rights under the
United States Constitution.

Federal Judge William C. Keady found in favor of the inmates, writing
that Parchman Farm violated the civil rights of the inmates by
inflicting cruel and unusual punishment. He ordered an immediate end to
all unconstitutional conditions and practices. Racial segregation of
inmates was abolished, as was the trusty system, which allowed certain
inmates to have power and control over others.

The prison was renovated in 1972 after the scathing ruling by Judge
Keady, who wrote that the prison was an affront to "modern standards of
decency." Among other reforms, the accommodations were made fit for
human habitation. The system of trusties was abolished. (The prison had
armed lifers with rifles and given them authority to oversee and guard
other inmates, which led to many abuses and murders.)

In integrated correctional facilities in northern and western states,
blacks represented a disproportionate number of the prisoners, in excess
of their proportion of the general population. They were often treated
as second-class citizens by white correctional officers. Blacks also
represented a disproportionately high number of death row inmates.
Eldridge Cleaver's book Soul on Ice was written from his experiences in
the California correctional system; it contributed to black militancy.

Cold War
========

-   *In Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy,
    the historian Mary L. Dudziak wrote that Communists critical of the
    United States accused the nation for its hypocrisy in portraying
    itself as the "leader of the free world," when so many of its
    citizens were subjected to severe racial discrimination and
    violence; she argued that this was a major factor in moving the
    government to support civil rights legislation.*

There was an international context for the actions of the U.S. federal
government during these years. Soviet media frequently covered racial
discrimination in the U.S. Deeming American criticism of Soviet Union
human rights abuses as hypocritical the Soviets would respond with "And
you are lynching Negroes". In his 1934 book Russia Today: What Can We
Learn from It?, Sherwood Eddy wrote: "In the most remote villages of
Russia today Americans are frequently asked what they are going to do to
the Scottsboro Negro boys and why they lynch Negroes."

In Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy, the
historian Mary L. Dudziak wrote that Communists critical of the United
States accused the nation for its hypocrisy in portraying itself as the
"leader of the free world," when so many of its citizens were subjected
to severe racial discrimination and violence; she argued that this was a
major factor in moving the government to support civil rights
legislation.

In popular culture
==================

-   *The 1954 to 1968 civil rights movement contributed strong cultural
    threads to American and international theater, song, film,
    television, and folk art.*

The 1954 to 1968 civil rights movement contributed strong cultural
threads to American and international theater, song, film, television,
and folk art.

Activist organizations
======================

-   *National/regional civil rights organizations*

-   *Medical Committee for Human Rights (MCHR)*

-   *Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR)*

-   *Local civil rights organizations*

National/regional civil rights organizations

Congress of Racial Equality (CORE)

Deacons for Defense and Justice

Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR)

Medical Committee for Human Rights (MCHR)

National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP)

National Council of Negro Women (NCNW)

Organization of Afro-American Unity

Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC)

Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC)

Southern Conference Educational Fund (SCEF)

Southern Student Organizing Committee (SSOC)

National economic empowerment organizations

Operation Breadbasket

Urban League

Local civil rights organizations

Albany Movement (Albany, GA)

Council of Federated Organizations (Mississippi)

Montgomery Improvement Association (Montgomery, AL)

Regional Council of Negro Leadership (Mississippi)

Women's Political Council (Montgomery, AL)

Individual activists
====================

See also
========

-   *Television News of the Civil Rights Era 1950–1970*

-   *List of civil rights leaders*

-   *Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project*

-   *List of Kentucky women in the civil rights era*

-   *Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument*

-   *List of photographers of the civil rights movement*

-   *Post–civil rights movement:*

List of civil rights leaders

List of Kentucky women in the civil rights era

List of photographers of the civil rights movement

"We Shall Overcome", unofficial movement anthem

History preservation:

Birmingham Civil Rights National Monument

Freedom Riders National Monument

Read's Drug Store (Baltimore), site of a 1955 desegregation sit-in

Seattle Civil Rights and Labor History Project

Television News of the Civil Rights Era 1950–1970

Post–civil rights movement:

Black Lives Matter

Post–civil rights era in African-American history

Notes
=====

References
==========

Bibliography
============

Further reading
===============

Historiography and memory
=========================

Autobiographies and memoirs
===========================

External links
==============

-   *Voices of Civil Rights – A project with the collaboration of AARP
    and the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR).*

-   *Civil Rights Movement Veterans \~ Provides movement history,
    personal stories, documents, and photos.*

-   *We Shall Overcome: Historic Places of the Civil Rights Movement –
    Provided by the National Park Service.*

Civil Rights Digital Library – Provided by the Digital Library of
Georgia.

Civil Rights Movement Veterans \~ Provides movement history, personal
stories, documents, and photos. Hosted by Tougaloo College.

Civil Rights in America – Provided by The National Archives of the
United Kingdom.

Television News of the Civil Rights Era 1950–1970 – Provided by the
University of Virginia.

Provided by the Library of Congress:\
The Civil Rights Era – Part of The African American Odyssey: A Quest for
Full Citizenship presentation.\
Voices of Civil Rights – A project with the collaboration of AARP and
the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR).

We Shall Overcome: Historic Places of the Civil Rights Movement –
Provided by the National Park Service.

Provided by Southern Poverty Law Center:\
"Teaching the Movement: The State Standards We Deserve" – Part of
"Teaching Tolerance" project published on September 19, 2011.\
"Teaching Tolerance Publishes Guide for Teaching the Civil Rights
Movement" – Part of "Teaching Tolerance" project published on March 26,
2014.\
"Teaching the Movement 2014: The State of Civil Rights Education in the
United States" – Part of "Teaching Tolerance" project published in 2014.

Civil Rights Teaching – Provided by Teaching for Change, a 501(c)(3)
organization.

SNCC Digital Gateway – Profiles and primary documents on the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the national civil rights
movement organization led by young people. A project of the SNCC Legacy
Project, Duke’s Center for Documentary Studies, and Duke University
Libraries.
