**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservative%20Political%20Action%20Conference\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Conservative Political Action Conference
========================================

-   *In 2011, ACU took CPAC on the road with its first Regional CPAC in
    Orlando, Florida.*

-   *CPAC is hosted by the American Conservative Union (ACU).*

-   *The Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC; /ˈsiːpæk/
    SEE-pak) is an annual political conference attended by conservative
    activists and elected officials from across the United States.*

The Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC; /ˈsiːpæk/ SEE-pak)
is an annual political conference attended by conservative activists and
elected officials from across the United States. CPAC is hosted by the
American Conservative Union (ACU).

In 2011, ACU took CPAC on the road with its first Regional CPAC in
Orlando, Florida. Since then ACU has hosted regional CPACs in Chicago,
Denver, St. Louis, and San Diego. Political front runners take the stage
at this convention.\[citation needed\]

The 2019 CPAC took place at the Gaylord National Resort & Convention
Center from February 27 to March 2, 2019.\[better source needed\]

![](media/image1.PNG){width="5.5in" height="4.543478783902012in"}\
*Number of CPAC attendees over time*

![](media/image2.JPG){width="5.5in" height="3.8949420384951883in"}\
*President George W. Bush speaking at the 2008 CPAC*

History
=======

-   *Ronald Reagan gave the inaugural keynote speech at CPAC in 1974.*

The conference was founded in 1974 by the American Conservative Union
and Young Americans for Freedom as a small gathering of dedicated
conservatives. Ronald Reagan gave the inaugural keynote speech at CPAC
in 1974. Like the conference's speakers today, the presidential hopeful
used it to share his vision for the country—"A Shining City Upon A
Hill," words borrowed from John Winthrop.

Controversies
=============

-   *In 2014, CPAC extended an invitation to the American Atheists,
    which was immediately withdrawn on the same day due to controversial
    statements.*

-   *Richard Spencer, a figurehead of the Alt-Right and a white
    supremacist, entered the lobby of the Gaylord National Hotel on
    February 23, 2017 in an attempt to access CPAC.*

In 2014, CPAC extended an invitation to the American Atheists, which was
immediately withdrawn on the same day due to controversial statements.

Richard Spencer, a figurehead of the Alt-Right and a white supremacist,
entered the lobby of the Gaylord National Hotel on February 23, 2017 in
an attempt to access CPAC. Organizers of the conference ejected him from
the hotel as soon as his presence was discovered, citing his "repugnant
\[views which\] ... have absolutely nothing to do with conservatism or
what we do here" as cause for rejecting his admission to CPAC. ACU's
Executive Director Dan Schneider castigated Spencer and the alt-right in
a main-stage speech, calling them "garden-variety, left-wing fascists,"
and saying that the alt-right "despises everything \[conservatives\]
believe in." Media members across the political spectrum, led by
progressive journalists and opinion columnists, salvoed the intrusion as
yet another attempt by hateful groups, like the alt-right, to conceal
their bigotry within a legitimate philosophy. Opinion columns in The New
York Times, and articles in Mother Jones and Rolling Stone voiced
concern about the 2017 interview of ex-Trump Adviser Steve Bannon and
ex-Trump Chief of Staff Reince Preibus with ACU Chairman Matt Schlapp,
advocating for the American Right to reject the tenets of the alt-right
(e.g. homophobia, xenophobia, sexism, racism, etc.).

Fringe groups at CPAC
=====================

-   *For the 2012 CPAC conference, the ACU board voted to not invite
    GOProud or the John Birch Society to the 2012 conference.*

-   *The 2010 CPAC featured co-sponsorship for the first time from the
    John Birch Society and GOProud, a gay conservative group.*

-   *The 2015 CPAC featured Jamila Bey who became the first atheist
    activist to address CPAC's annual meeting.*

The 2010 CPAC featured co-sponsorship for the first time from the John
Birch Society and GOProud, a gay conservative group. GoProud is credited
in the media for initiating talks with ACU to invite Donald Trump to
speak at CPAC 2011. The 2011 CPAC speech Trump gave is credited for
helping kick-start his political career within the Republican Party.
Christopher R. Barron, co-founder of GOProud who would later not only
endorse Trump's 2016 presidential campaign, but also launch LGBT for
Trump, said he "would love to see Mr. Trump run for president."

For the 2012 CPAC conference, the ACU board voted to not invite GOProud
or the John Birch Society to the 2012 conference.

The 2015 CPAC featured Jamila Bey who became the first atheist activist
to address CPAC's annual meeting. The 2016 CPAC featured co-sponsorship
for the first time from the Log Cabin Republicans.

Milo Yiannopoulos invitation
============================

-   *In December 2016, CPAC extended an invitation to conservative
    blogger Milo Yiannopoulos to speak at the event, despite his history
    of controversial views on feminism, racial minorities, and
    transgender issues.*

In December 2016, CPAC extended an invitation to conservative blogger
Milo Yiannopoulos to speak at the event, despite his history of
controversial views on feminism, racial minorities, and transgender
issues. The invitation was canceled when the Reagan Battalion re-posted
a video of 2016 and 2015 YouTube videos in which Yiannopoulos is heard
making comments defending sexual relationships between adult men and
13-year-old boys, citing his own sexual experiences at that age with a
Catholic priest.

Annual straw poll
=================

-   *Overall, Mitt Romney holds the record of winning more CPAC straw
    polls than any other individual, with four.*

-   *The annual CPAC straw poll vote traditionally serves as a barometer
    for the feelings of the conservative movement.*

-   *One component of CPAC is evaluating conservative candidates for
    president, and the straw poll serves generally to quantify
    conservative opinion.*

The annual CPAC straw poll vote traditionally serves as a barometer for
the feelings of the conservative movement. During the conference,
attendees are encouraged to fill out a survey that asks questions on a
variety of issues. The questions regarding the most popular possible
presidential candidates are the most widely reported. One component of
CPAC is evaluating conservative candidates for president, and the straw
poll serves generally to quantify conservative opinion.

Overall, Mitt Romney holds the record of winning more CPAC straw polls
than any other individual, with four. Ronald Reagan, Jack Kemp and Rand
Paul follow with three consecutive wins each, followed by Ron Paul with
two wins. Of these five, the Pauls are the only two to win more than one
straw poll, yet never appear on a Republican presidential ticket in any
election (although Ron Paul did receive one Electoral College vote in
2016).

Awards
======

-   *Since 2007, the Jeane Kirkpatrick Academic Freedom Award has been
    presented at CPAC in memory of Jeane Kirkpatrick.*

Since 2007, the Jeane Kirkpatrick Academic Freedom Award has been
presented at CPAC in memory of Jeane Kirkpatrick. The award is sponsored
by the Bradley Foundation, and its first recipient was Matt Sanchez. In
2010, the Ronald Reagan Award was given to the Tea Party movement, which
marked the first time it was ever given to a group instead of an
individual.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Media related to Conservative Political Action Conference at
    Wikimedia Commons*

-   *Home page for the American Conservative Union, the organization
    that runs CPAC*

Media related to Conservative Political Action Conference at Wikimedia
Commons

Official website

Home page for the American Conservative Union, the organization that
runs CPAC
