**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cordell%20Reagon\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Cordell Reagon
==============

-   *He was the founding member of The Freedom Singers of the Student
    Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and a leader of the Albany
    Movement during the Civil Rights Movement.*

Cordell Hull Reagon (February 22, 1943 – November 12, 1996) was an
American singer and activist. He was the founding member of The Freedom
Singers of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and a
leader of the Albany Movement during the Civil Rights Movement.

Early life
==========

-   *His powerful tenor voice spread the message of the civil rights
    movement throughout the United States and Canada in the 1960s.*

Reagon was born in Nashville, Tennessee, and was named for Cordell Hull,
the Secretary of State under President Franklin D. Roosevelt from 1933
to 1944. His powerful tenor voice spread the message of the civil rights
movement throughout the United States and Canada in the 1960s.

Activism and music career
=========================

-   *Reagon was 16 years of age in 1959 when he emerged as a leader of
    the civil rights movement in Albany, Georgia.*

-   *In 1962, at the encouragement of friend Pete Seeger, Reagon founded
    The Freedom Singers, a quartet of two men and two women who sang
    gospel-style freedom songs to rouse support for the civil rights
    movement.*

Reagon was 16 years of age in 1959 when he emerged as a leader of the
civil rights movement in Albany, Georgia. James Forman, who became the
executive secretary of SNCC, called him "the baby of the movement."
Reagon, who was arrested more than thirty times in the South for his
anti-segregation activities, conducted nonviolent training workshops for
hundreds of volunteers who journeyed to the South to work on voter
registration campaigns and other civil rights projects.

In 1962, at the encouragement of friend Pete Seeger, Reagon founded The
Freedom Singers, a quartet of two men and two women who sang
gospel-style freedom songs to rouse support for the civil rights
movement. The songs brought the struggle for civil rights and its
activities to a wide audience. The people involved were already
singers—in church choirs, in schools, including his first wife, Bernice.
Organizing the music simply tapped into the singing energy of the
community and gave struggle a focus.

In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Reagon became active in the movements
against the Vietnam War, nuclear weapons, and environmental destruction.
From 1965 until 1988 he lived in New York City with his second wife,
Merble Reagon and worked as an organizer for the Social Service
Employees Union, Mobilization for Survival, was a youth worker for
Mobilization for Youth and a career and vocational counselor. In 1988 he
moved to Berkeley, where he founded the environmental group Urban
Habitat and Urban Justice Organization.

Cordell Reagon remained an activist until his 1996 death at age 53 in
his Berkeley, California, apartment, the victim of a still-unsolved
homicide.

Personal
========

-   *Reagon, who was the youngest of 14 children, is also survived by a
    brother and several sisters including Meryle Joy Reagon.*

-   *Reagon's two marriages—to Bernice Johnson Reagon of Albany,
    Georgia, and to Merble Harrington of New York, New York, ended in
    divorce.*

Reagon's two marriages—to Bernice Johnson Reagon of Albany, Georgia, and
to Merble Harrington of New York, New York, ended in divorce. He is
survived by his children, Toshi of Brooklyn, Kwan of Oakland,
California, and Mariama of Manhattan. Reagon, who was the youngest of 14
children, is also survived by a brother and several sisters including
Meryle Joy Reagon.

External links
==============

-   *Civil Rights Digital Library: Cordell Reagon*

-   *Cordell Reagon New York Times Obituary*

-   *The Organizing Role of Music in the Civil Rights Movement*

SNCC Digital Gateway: Cordell Reagon, Documentary website created by the
SNCC Legacy Project and Duke University, telling the story of the
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee & grassroots organizing from
the inside-out

Cordell Reagon New York Times Obituary

Civil Rights Digital Library: Cordell Reagon

The Organizing Role of Music in the Civil Rights Movement
