**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Courtney\_Taylor-Taylor\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Courtney Taylor-Taylor
======================

-   *Courtney A. Taylor (born July 20, 1967), known as Courtney
    Taylor-Taylor, is an American singer-songwriter from Portland,
    Oregon.*

-   *Taylor-Taylor has written the majority of the band's songs.*

-   *He is the lead singer and guitarist of alternative rock band The
    Dandy Warhols, a band he co-founded.*

-   *Taylor-Taylor has co-written a graphic novel entitled One Model
    Nation, about a fictional 1970s German krautrock band.*

Courtney A. Taylor (born July 20, 1967), known as Courtney
Taylor-Taylor, is an American singer-songwriter from Portland, Oregon.
He is the lead singer and guitarist of alternative rock band The Dandy
Warhols, a band he co-founded. Taylor-Taylor has written the majority of
the band's songs.

Taylor-Taylor has co-written a graphic novel entitled One Model Nation,
about a fictional 1970s German krautrock band. It was released in 2009.
This was accompanied by a studio album titled Totalwerks, Vol. 1
(1969–1977), a fake greatest hits album by the fictional band, released
in 2012.

Early life and education
========================

-   *After graduating, Taylor-Taylor worked as a mechanic while playing
    drums for local band Nero's Rome.*

-   *Taylor-Taylor attended Sunset High School in Beaverton, a suburb of
    Portland, and studied sociology, psychology and music at Cascade
    College, also in Portland.*

Taylor-Taylor attended Sunset High School in Beaverton, a suburb of
Portland, and studied sociology, psychology and music at Cascade
College, also in Portland.\[citation needed\] He recalls sticking out as
a teenager: "You don't fit in if you're a make-up-wearing weirdo,
surrounded by large, clumsy guys and cheerleaders". He found refuge in
the work of Friedrich Nietzsche and Kurt Vonnegut. It was here he met
future bandmate Peter Holmström.

After graduating, Taylor-Taylor worked as a mechanic while playing drums
for local band Nero's Rome. He was also the drummer in the
Portland-based glam rock/pop band The Beauty Stab.

Career
======

Music career
============

-   *Taylor-Taylor appears in and narrates the film Dig!, a documentary
    chronicling the early years of the relationship between his band,
    The Dandy Warhols, and The Brian Jonestown Massacre.*

Taylor-Taylor appears in and narrates the film Dig!, a documentary
chronicling the early years of the relationship between his band, The
Dandy Warhols, and The Brian Jonestown Massacre.

Non-music career
================

-   *Taylor-Taylor appeared in an episode of the second season of the TV
    show Veronica Mars, "Cheatty Cheatty Bang Bang", performing the song
    "Love Hurts".*

-   *Taylor-Taylor was one of the contributors to the book Sex Tips from
    Rock Stars by Paul Miles, published by Omnibus Press in July 2010.*

Taylor-Taylor appeared in an episode of the second season of the TV show
Veronica Mars, "Cheatty Cheatty Bang Bang", performing the song "Love
Hurts". He appeared in the 2009 music documentary film The Heart Is a
Drum Machine, as well as a 2011 episode of the Australian music quiz
television show Spicks and Specks.

Taylor-Taylor was one of the contributors to the book Sex Tips from Rock
Stars by Paul Miles, published by Omnibus Press in July 2010.

Personal life
=============

-   *Taylor-Taylor informally added the second "Taylor" to his last name
    around 1999.*

-   *Like his cousin and bandmate Brent DeBoer, Taylor-Taylor is of
    Dutch ancestry.*

-   *So she started calling herself Gina Williams-Williams, and then I
    became Courtney Taylor-Taylor".*

-   *Taylor-Taylor has also said: "I was just tripping on the 'my
    parents are still married' thing.*

Taylor-Taylor informally added the second "Taylor" to his last name
around 1999.\[citation needed\] On the issue of his double-barrelled
surname, Taylor-Taylor has said: "There have been so many wonderful
explanations that I would hate to stop that by addressing it. It's
wonderfully silly and fun so let's keep it that way". Taylor-Taylor has
also said: "I was just tripping on the 'my parents are still married'
thing. Basically, when my friend Gina Williams started dating my other
friend Kevin Williams, they decided to hyphenate their names. So she
started calling herself Gina Williams-Williams, and then I became
Courtney Taylor-Taylor".

Like his cousin and bandmate Brent DeBoer, Taylor-Taylor is of Dutch
ancestry.

As the chief songwriter for "Bohemian Like You", Taylor-Taylor earned
approximately 1.5 million US dollars in royalties for Vodafone's use of
the song in television commercials in the telecommunications company's
native United Kingdom (and other territories Vodafone operate in,
including Australia and Greece) in late-2001. With part of these
earnings, he purchased a quarter-of-a-city block and turned it into a
complex with space for recording, film editing, and web design.

On December 22, 2007, Taylor-Taylor married long-time girlfriend Lockett
Albritton at the Columbia Gorge Hotel in Hood River, Oregon. Lockett
Taylor is a yoga practitioner and instructor. On February 1, 2010, she
gave birth to their first child, a son, Ajax.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Courtney Taylor-Taylor on IMDb*

-   *The Dandy Warhols' official website*

Courtney Taylor-Taylor on IMDb

The Dandy Warhols' official website

One Model Nation website
