**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel%20Goldin\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Daniel Goldin
=============

-   *He was appointed by President George H. W. Bush and also served
    under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush.*

-   *Daniel Saul Goldin (born July 23, 1940) served as the 9th and
    longest-tenured Administrator of NASA from April 1, 1992, to
    November 17, 2001.*

Daniel Saul Goldin (born July 23, 1940) served as the 9th and
longest-tenured Administrator of NASA from April 1, 1992, to November
17, 2001. He was appointed by President George H. W. Bush and also
served under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush.

Career
======

-   *Since leaving NASA, Daniel Goldin has been engaged in robotics
    research at the Neurosciences Institute in La Jolla, California.*

-   *In 1992, Goldin brought back the traditional NASA blue "meatball"
    logo.*

-   *On November 17, 2001, President George W. Bush accepted Mr.
    Goldin's resignation as NASA administrator.*

Born in New York City, Goldin earned a Bachelor of Science degree in
Mechanical Engineering from the City College of New York in 1962. He
began his career at NASA's Lewis Research Center in Cleveland, Ohio that
year, and worked on electric propulsion systems for human interplanetary
travel.

Goldin left NASA a few years later to work at the TRW Space and
Technology Group in Redondo Beach, California. During a 25-year career
at TRW, Goldin eventually became Vice President and General Manager and
led projects that conceptualized and produced advanced communication
spacecraft, space technologies, and scientific instruments.

When Goldin returned to NASA as administrator, he pioneered the "faster,
better, cheaper" approach that proposed NASA could cut costs while still
delivering a wide variety of aerospace programs. The approach ultimately
proved controversial with the loss of several missions to Mars due to
project management failures. During his administration, Goldin
supervised projects such as the Mars Pathfinder, Hubble Space Telescope
servicing missions, and the International Space Station. Goldin
initially promoted a low-cost manned lunar project, but following the
1996 announcement that evidence had been found of biological activity in
Martian meteorite ALH-84001, the focus was shifted to unmanned Mars
probes.

A criticism of Goldin's administration is that he failed to provide a
far-sighted focus for NASA other than inherited projects. However, in
mid-1999 he and senior Agency leadership quietly created the Decadal
Planning Team and its successors, which paved the way for NASA's
contribution to the Vision for Space Exploration. Additional controversy
related to Goldin are found in the documentary film, Orphans of Apollo.

In 1992, Goldin brought back the traditional NASA blue "meatball" logo.
It had been replaced in 1975 by the NASA red "worm" logo. By 1997,
Goldin had started a largely successful campaign within NASA to
eradicate the "worm". He would become irate whenever he would see a
"worm" logo that was not replaced.

On November 17, 2001, President George W. Bush accepted Mr. Goldin's
resignation as NASA administrator. Goldin was replaced first by Dr.
Daniel S. Mulville (acting 19 Nov - 21 Dec, 2001) and finally by Sean
O'Keefe (21 Dec 2001 - Feb 11, 2005). Since leaving NASA, Daniel Goldin
has been engaged in robotics research at the Neurosciences Institute in
La Jolla, California.

He is the President and CEO of KnuEdge (formerly Intellisis), a company
he founded in 2005 that produces neural computing hardware. The company
shut down operations in 2018.

In 2003, Goldin was selected to be the ninth president of Boston
University, but his contract was terminated a day before he took office
at a cost of \$1.8 million.

Quotes
======

-   *"The only thing I wanted to work on in my life was space.*

"My eyeball kept getting distorted more and more, so I became more and
more nearsighted. At that time, if you had a detached retina due to the
buildup of pressure on the eye you could go blind. In the Bronx, you
played stickball and baseball and basketball in the school yard. I
wasn't allowed to do that and I became different than my friends. I was
self conscious. I wanted to be like them but I was forced by health
reasons to be different."

"The only thing I wanted to work on in my life was space. I would do it
any way I could."

"Never try and eat a baseball, it's never any good."

"Go with imagination, ingenuity, and audacity. Explore, discover, change
the world, and have fun while you're doing it."

"Pure success results from mediocre goals."

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *NASA biography of Daniel Saul Goldin*

NASA biography of Daniel Saul Goldin

Goldin Stands by 'Faster, Better, Cheaper' Credo - by Alex Canizares at
the Wayback Machine (archived July 23, 2008)

Appearances on C-SPAN

 This article incorporates public domain material from websites or
documents of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
