**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daniel%20Dale\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Daniel Dale
===========

-   *Dale was hired in June 2019 as a CNN reporter.*

-   *Daniel Dale is a Canadian journalist who served as the Toronto
    Star's Washington bureau chief from 2015 to 2019.*

Daniel Dale is a Canadian journalist who served as the Toronto Star's
Washington bureau chief from 2015 to 2019. Dale was hired in June 2019
as a CNN reporter.

Biography
=========

-   *In 2013, then Toronto Mayor Rob Ford made disparaging remarks about
    Dale as part of "meddling media", and accused Dale of taking
    pictures on Ford's property.*

-   *Dale was born to Ronald Dale and Jennifer Dale, a Jewish family .*

-   *Dale arrived in Washington, DC, to serve as the Washington
    correspondent for the Toronto Star in 2015.*

-   *After four years, Dale moved to the United States where he is
    focusing on the administration of U.S. President Donald Trump.*

Dale was born to Ronald Dale and Jennifer Dale, a Jewish family . His
siblings are Andrew, Brittany and Ryan. He was raised in Thornhill,
Ontario. He earned a B.B.A. from York University's Schulich School of
Business. After graduating, he worked for the Toronto Star as their
Toronto City Hall reporter and bureau chief covering the administration
of Mayor Rob Ford.

In 2013, then Toronto Mayor Rob Ford made disparaging remarks about Dale
as part of "meddling media", and accused Dale of taking pictures on
Ford's property. Ford later retracted the accusations, "there was
absolutely no basis for the statement I made about Mr. Dale taking
pictures", in response to Dale launching a lawsuit against him. After a
lengthy apology from Mayor Ford, Dale cancelled the lawsuit. After four
years, Dale moved to the United States where he is focusing on the
administration of U.S. President Donald Trump. Dale arrived in
Washington, DC, to serve as the Washington correspondent for the Toronto
Star in 2015.

Awards and honors
=================

-   *Dale's awards and honors include:*

Dale's awards and honors include:

National Newspaper Award: Norman Webster Award for International
Reporting (2019)

National Newspaper Award: Short Feature (2011)

Edward Goff Penny Memorial Prize (2011)

Edward Goff Penny Memorial Prize (2010)

The National Newspaper Award: Short Feature (2011); the Edward Goff
Penny Memorial Prize (2011 and 2010).

Dale's fact-checking of Donald Trump
====================================

-   *Dale has written about his fact-checking of Donald Trump's
    statements in the Washington Post on November 16, 2018, in the
    Toronto Star, in Politico Magazine in October 2016 , and in an
    interview by Toronto Life Other journalists quote a list of
    questionable and untrue statements and tweets from President Trump
    that Dale has been maintaining.*

Dale has written about his fact-checking of Donald Trump's statements in
the Washington Post on November 16, 2018, in the Toronto Star, in
Politico Magazine in October 2016 , and in an interview by Toronto Life
Other journalists quote a list of questionable and untrue statements and
tweets from President Trump that Dale has been maintaining. On October
23, 2018, Dale told Judy Woodruff, of the PBS Newshour, that he had
found that Trump's rate of dishonesty was increasing. Maggie Seroza,
writing in Spin magazine extensively quoted from Dale, in an article
that repeated Dale's notes when Trump showed he didn't know the name of
Democratic Party, suggesting that the Democrats should rename their
party the Democratic Party, when that is, in fact, the party's name , as
did Mehdi Hasan in Deconstructed\
Daniel W. Drezner, writing in the Washington Post extensively quoted
from Dale in an article on Trump's claims on Medicare

Dale's fact-checking of other politicians
=========================================

-   *Kamala Harris was at least slightly misleading about how
    responsible she was for pushing a for-profit college out of
    business" Dale fact-checked both Donald Trump and Hilary Clinton
    during the 2016 presidential candidate debates.*

"Joe Biden was wrong about his record on private prisons. Kamala Harris
was at least slightly misleading about how responsible she was for
pushing a for-profit college out of business" Dale fact-checked both
Donald Trump and Hilary Clinton during the 2016 presidential candidate
debates.

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *https://torontolife.com/tag/daniel-dale/*

-   *https://www.marathi.tv/political-analyst/daniel-dale/*

-   *https://www.canadalandshow.com/daniel-dale-on-trump-bloomberg-and-the-meaning-of-off-the-record/*

https://torontolife.com/tag/daniel-dale/

https://www.canadalandshow.com/daniel-dale-on-trump-bloomberg-and-the-meaning-of-off-the-record/

https://www.marathi.tv/political-analyst/daniel-dale/
