**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dennis%20Banks\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Dennis Banks
============

-   *He was a longtime leader of the American Indian Movement, which he
    co-founded in Minneapolis, Minnesota in 1968 to represent urban
    Indians.*

-   *Dennis Banks (Ojibwe, April 12, 1937 – October 29, 2017) was a
    Native American activist, teacher, and author.*

Dennis Banks (Ojibwe, April 12, 1937 – October 29, 2017) was a Native
American activist, teacher, and author. He was a longtime leader of the
American Indian Movement, which he co-founded in Minneapolis, Minnesota
in 1968 to represent urban Indians.

Born on Leech Lake Indian Reservation in northern Minnesota, he was also
known as Nowa Cumig (Naawakamig in the Double Vowel System), which in
the Ojibwe language means "in the center of the universe."

Work with AIM
=============

-   *In 1968, Banks co-founded the American Indian Movement (AIM) in
    Minneapolis.*

-   *Banks and other AIM activists led an armed takeover and occupation
    of Wounded Knee.*

-   *Banks participated in the 1969–1971 occupation of Alcatraz Island,
    initiated by Indian students from San Francisco of the Red Power
    movement.*

-   *Banks was the principal negotiator and leader of the Wounded Knee
    forces.*

In 1968, Banks co-founded the American Indian Movement (AIM) in
Minneapolis. They were seeking to ensure and protect the civil rights of
Native Americans living in urban areas.

Banks participated in the 1969–1971 occupation of Alcatraz Island,
initiated by Indian students from San Francisco of the Red Power
movement. It was intended to highlight Native American issues and
promote Indian sovereignty on their own lands. In 1972, he assisted in
the organization of AIM's "Trail of Broken Treaties", a caravan of
numerous activist groups across the United States to Washington, D.C. to
call attention to the plight of Native Americans. The caravan members
anticipated meeting with United States Congress leaders about related
issues, but government officials, most notably Harrison Loesch, the
Interior Department Assistant Secretary responsible for the Bureau of
Indian Affairs (BIA), refused to meet with delegates. The activists
seized and occupied the headquarters of the Department of Interior; in
the process some vandalized the offices of the BIA. Many valuable Indian
land deeds were destroyed or lost during the occupation.\[citation
needed\]

In 1973 Banks went to Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota when
the local Lakota civil rights organization asked for help in dealing
with law enforcement authorities in nearby border towns. Residents of
Pine Ridge believed the police had failed to prosecute the murder of a
young Lakota man. Under Banks' leadership, AIM led a protest in Custer,
South Dakota in 1973 against judicial proceedings that had resulted in
the reduction of charges of a white man to a second degree offense for
murdering a Native American.\[citation needed\]

AIM became involved in the political faction wanting to oust Richard
Wilson, the elected chairman of the Oglala Sioux Tribe. Opponents
believed that he was acting autocratically, including recruiting a
private police force. A failure of an impeachment proceeding against him
led to a large protest. Banks and other AIM activists led an armed
takeover and occupation of Wounded Knee. After a siege of 71 days by
federal armed law enforcement, which received national attention, the
occupation was ended. A U.S. marshal was shot and paralyzed in March. A
Cherokee and an Oglala Lakota were fatally shot in April 1973. Civil
rights activist Ray Robinson, who had joined the protesters, disappeared
during the occupation and is believed to have been murdered.

Thirty resident families returned to the village to find that their
homes and businesses had been looted and destroyed by the activists. The
town was never rebuilt. Banks was the principal negotiator and leader of
the Wounded Knee forces. Subsequent investigation of Wilson found
questionable accounting practices, but no evidence of criminal offenses.
As a result of involvement in Custer and Wounded Knee, Banks and 300
others were arrested by the federal government and faced trial. He was
acquitted of the Wounded Knee charges, but was convicted of incitement
to riot and assault stemming from the earlier confrontation at
Custer.\[citation needed\]

Aquash murder and trial
=======================

-   *\[citation needed\]*

-   *Witnesses at the 2004 trial of Arlo Looking Cloud included Darlene
    Ka-Mook Nichols, Banks' former wife, who testified that she believed
    Aquash had been ordered killed by AIM leaders who feared she might
    be an FBI informant.*

-   *Refusing the prison term, Banks went underground and organized a
    small armed AIM group.*

-   *In 1975, he had been serving as one of Banks' bodyguards.*

-   *In 2014, The New York Times Magazine spoke to Banks for an in-depth
    feature about the murders of Aquash and Robinson.*

Refusing the prison term, Banks went underground and organized a small
armed AIM group. It included Anna Mae Pictou Aquash, considered the
highest-ranking woman in AIM. About this time, the two were also
involved in a personal relationship. After disappearing from Denver in
late 1975, Aquash was found murdered in February 1976 at the Pine Ridge
Reservation. She had been shot in the back of the head execution style,
and her murder was unsolved for decades.\[citation needed\]

Banks was given amnesty in California by then-Governor Jerry Brown, who
refused to extradite him to South Dakota to face the charges related to
activities in the 1973 Custer protests. He also received financial
support from actor and AIM sympathizer Marlon Brando.\[citation needed\]

In January 2003, a federal grand jury indicted Arlo Looking Cloud and
John Graham in the murder of Aquash. Since 2004, they have been
convicted by federal and state juries; each is serving a life sentence.
Witnesses at the 2004 trial of Arlo Looking Cloud included Darlene
Ka-Mook Nichols, Banks' former wife, who testified that she believed
Aquash had been ordered killed by AIM leaders who feared she might be an
FBI informant. Aquash and Nichols had heard Leonard Peltier brag in 1975
about having seen two FBI agents shot to death earlier that year at Pine
Ridge. Peltier was convicted of murdering the agents in 1977, and
sentenced to two life terms. He remains imprisoned.

In 2008, Vine Richard "Dick" Marshall was indicted by a federal grand
jury for aiding and abetting the murder of Aquash; he was alleged to
have provided John Graham with a gun. He was acquitted of the charge. In
1975, he had been serving as one of Banks' bodyguards. Aquash was
brought to Marshall's house on the Pine Ridge Reservation in December
1975 before being taken to the site of her murder. Authorities continue
to investigate the Aquash murder. In 2014, The New York Times Magazine
spoke to Banks for an in-depth feature about the murders of Aquash and
Robinson.

Education and career
====================

-   *Banks organized the reburial ceremonies.*

-   *Banks participated in its governance and fundraising.*

-   *During his time in California from 1976 to 1983, Banks earned an
    associate's degree from the University of California, Davis.*

-   *After Governor Brown left office, in 1984 Banks received sanctuary
    from the Onondaga Nation in upstate New York.*

-   *Dennis Banks delivered a "Manifesto for Change" to Representative
    John Conyers (D-CA).*

During his time in California from 1976 to 1983, Banks earned an
associate's degree from the University of California, Davis. He taught
at Deganawidah Quetzalcoatl University (DQU), a Native
American-controlled institute of alternative higher learning, where he
became the first American Indian chancellor. In 1978, he established the
first spiritual run from Davis to Los Angeles, which is now an annual
event. In the spring of 1979, he taught at Stanford University.

After Governor Brown left office, in 1984 Banks received sanctuary from
the Onondaga Nation in upstate New York. While on their reservation in
New York, Banks organized the Great Jim Thorpe Longest Run from New York
to Los Angeles; the goal was to gain restoration of the gold medals
which Thorpe had won at the 1912 Olympics for the Thorpe family.

In 1985, Banks left Onondaga to surrender to federal law enforcement
officials in South Dakota. He served 18 months in prison related to the
1973 charges for the Custer riot. After his release, he worked as a drug
and alcohol counselor on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation. During 1987,
grave robbers in Uniontown, Kentucky were halted in their digging for
artifacts in American Indian grave sites. Banks organized the reburial
ceremonies. His activities resulted in the states of Kentucky and
Indiana passing strict legislation against grave desecration.\[citation
needed\]

In 2006, Banks led Sacred Run 2006, a spiritual run from San Francisco's
Alcatraz Island to Washington, D.C. The runners followed the ancient
Native American tradition of bringing a message of "Land, Life and
Peace" from village to village. They traveled around 100 miles every day
and entered Washington, D.C. on Earth Day, April 22, 2006. Along the
way, they took a southern route in solidarity with those who were
rebuilding after hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Major events were held in
Albuquerque, New Orleans, Philadelphia, Mississippi, a civil rights
site; Knoxville, and Washington, D.C.

Since "The Longest Walk" in 1978, Sacred Runs have developed as an
international movement. Sacred Run 2006 had runners from Japan,
Australia, Ireland, and Canada, as well as many from the United States.
In 2008, the International "The Longest Walk 2" followed the Sacred Run
2006 route, as well as the original route of 1978 walk. Dennis Banks
delivered a "Manifesto for Change" to Representative John Conyers
(D-CA).

Banks was a member of the Board of Trustees for Leech Lake Tribal
College, a public, two-year college located just outside Cass Lake,
Minnesota. Founded and operated by the federally recognized Leech Lake
Band of Ojibwe, it serves primarily Native American students. Banks
participated in its governance and fundraising.

Politics
========

-   *In August 2016, Banks received the vice presidential nomination of
    the Peace and Freedom Party, a socialist political party with ballot
    access in California.*

In August 2016, Banks received the vice presidential nomination of the
Peace and Freedom Party, a socialist political party with ballot access
in California. He appeared on the California ballot with presidential
nominee Gloria La Riva.

Other activities
================

-   *The musical release Still Strong (1993) features Banks' original
    songs, as well as traditional Native American songs.*

-   *Banks had roles in the movies War Party (1988), The Last of the
    Mohicans (1992), Thunderheart (1992), and Older Than America
    (2008).*

Banks had roles in the movies War Party (1988), The Last of the Mohicans
(1992), Thunderheart (1992), and Older Than America (2008).

The musical release Still Strong (1993) features Banks' original songs,
as well as traditional Native American songs. He also participated as a
musician on such albums as Peter Gabriel's Les Musiques du Monde and
Peter Matthiessen's No Boundaries.

Marriage and family
===================

-   *Banks has several stepchildren: Roland (Kawliga) Blanchard, Beverly
    Baribeau, Glenda Roberts, Denise Banks, Pearl Blanchard, and
    Danielle Louise Dickey.*

-   *According to birth records from Minnesota, Banks had seven children
    with wife Jeanette Banks: Janice (born March 2, 1962), Darla (born
    February 18, 1963), fraternal twins Deanna Jane and Dennis James
    (born April 20, 1964), Red Elk (born June 7, 1970), Tatanka Wanbli
    (born September 7, 1971), and Minoh Bekwad Banks (born October 10,
    1992).*

Early in his life, Banks enlisted in the United States Air Force and was
sent to Japan. While there, he married a woman named Machiko. After they
had been together for two years, Machiko had a daughter, Michiko. Banks
left Japan after being court martialed by the Air Force for being AWOL
(Absent Without Official Leave). He never saw Machiko or Michiko again.
He returned to Japan several times, but Machiko had remarried and
Michiko was at university in Northern Japan.

According to birth records from Minnesota, Banks had seven children with
wife Jeanette Banks: Janice (born March 2, 1962), Darla (born February
18, 1963), fraternal twins Deanna Jane and Dennis James (born April 20,
1964), Red Elk (born June 7, 1970), Tatanka Wanbli (born September 7,
1971), and Minoh Bekwad Banks (born October 10, 1992).\[citation
needed\]

At Pine Ridge Reservation, Banks met Darlene Kamook Nichols, who was 17
and still in high school. He was 32. After she graduated, they started
seeing each other and married. They had three daughters and a son
together: Tokala, Tiopa, Tasina and son Tacanunpa Banks. They later
divorced. (Kamook Nichols remarried and is now known as Darlene
Ecoffey.)

In Salt Lake City he had a daughter, named Arrow, with Angie Begay
(Navajo).

Banks has several stepchildren: Roland (Kawliga) Blanchard, Beverly
Baribeau, Glenda Roberts, Denise Banks, Pearl Blanchard, and Danielle
Louise Dickey. (Dickey was murdered in 2007 on the Turtle Mountain
Reservation in North Dakota). He has a granddaughter named Migizi
Roberts from Minneapolis, Minnesota.\[citation needed\]

Discography
===========

-   *In 2012, Banks joined forces with Golden Globe and Grammy
    Award-winning artist Kitaro in celebration of the Earth on the CD
    Let Mother Earth Speak.*

-   *The project contains a message of international peace, intertwined
    with stories and life lessons from Banks, and featuring the music of
    Kitaro.*

In 2012, Banks joined forces with Golden Globe and Grammy Award-winning
artist Kitaro in celebration of the Earth on the CD Let Mother Earth
Speak. The project contains a message of international peace,
intertwined with stories and life lessons from Banks, and featuring the
music of Kitaro. The album was released on September 11, 2012, on Domo
Records.

Death
=====

-   *Banks died at the age of 80 of complications from pneumonia
    following heart surgery on October 29, 2017 in Rochester,
    Minnesota.*

Banks died at the age of 80 of complications from pneumonia following
heart surgery on October 29, 2017 in Rochester, Minnesota.

Filmography
===========

-   *American Experience - TV Series documentary - We Shall Remain:
    "Part V - Wounded Knee" - Himself (2009)*

War Party - Ben Crowkiller / Dead Crow Chief (1988)

The Last of the Mohicans - Ongewasgone (1992)

Older Than America - Pete Goodfeather (2008)

American Experience - TV Series documentary - We Shall Remain: "Part V -
Wounded Knee" - Himself (2009)

A Good Day to Die - Documentary - Himself (2010)

Nowa Cumig: The Drum Will Never Stop (2011 film) - Documentary - Himself
(2011)

Autobiography
=============

-   *Banks, Dennis and Richard Erdoes (2004).*

-   *Ojibwa Warrior: Dennis Banks and the Rise of the American Indian
    Movement, Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press.*

Banks, Dennis and Richard Erdoes (2004). Ojibwa Warrior: Dennis Banks
and the Rise of the American Indian Movement, Norman, Oklahoma:
University of Oklahoma Press. .mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}ISBN 0-8061-3580-8

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Dennis Banks Official Website*

-   *Dennis Banks at AllMovie*

-   *Dennis Banks on IMDb*

Nowa Cumig Institute

SacredRun, 2007

Still Strong

Dennis Banks on IMDb

Dennis Banks at AllMovie

Dennis Banks Official Website

Let Mother Earth Speak Facebook Page

A Good Day to Die - film

Nowa Cumig: The Drum Will Never Stop - film
