**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Donald%20L.%20Hollowell\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Donald L. Hollowell
===================

-   *Donald Lee Hollowell (December 19, 1917 – December 27, 2004) was an
    American civil rights attorney during the Civil Rights Movement, in
    the state of Georgia.*

-   *He is the subject of a 2010 documentary film, Donald L. Hollowell:
    Foot Soldier for Equal Justice.*

Donald Lee Hollowell (December 19, 1917 – December 27, 2004) was an
American civil rights attorney during the Civil Rights Movement, in the
state of Georgia. He successfully sued to integrate Atlanta's public
schools, Georgia colleges, universities and public transit, freed Martin
Luther King, Jr. from prison, and mentored civil rights attorneys
(including Vernon Jordan and Horace Ward). The first black regional
director of a federal agency (the EEOC), Hollowell is best remembered
for his instrumental role in winning the desegregation of the University
of Georgia in 1961. He is the subject of a 2010 documentary film, Donald
L. Hollowell: Foot Soldier for Equal Justice.

Biography
=========

Early years
===========

-   *Donald Hollowell was born and raised in Wichita, Kansas, and earned
    a high school diploma while serving six years in the U.S. Army's
    10th Cavalry Regiment (the original Buffalo Soldier regiment).*

-   *In 1947, Hollowell graduated magna cum laude from Lane College in
    Jackson, Tennessee, and he earned his law degree from Loyola
    University Chicago School of Law in 1951.*

Donald Hollowell was born and raised in Wichita, Kansas, and earned a
high school diploma while serving six years in the U.S. Army's 10th
Cavalry Regiment (the original Buffalo Soldier regiment). Although in
Kansas and therefore not subject to the racist Jim Crow laws of the
South, he faced blatant racism and discrimination while serving in the
U.S. Army during World War II. Hollowell recounted that "army officials
relegated him to eating in the kitchen, sleeping in quarters adjacent to
prisoners, and patronizing Jim Crow canteens." Hollowell's experiences
with racial segregation and discrimination and his involvement with the
Southern Negro Youth Congress after the war inspired him to pursue the
study of law to help in the fight for social justice. In 1947, Hollowell
graduated magna cum laude from Lane College in Jackson, Tennessee, and
he earned his law degree from Loyola University Chicago School of Law in
1951.

Legal career
============

-   *King also defended Dr. King and hundreds of civil rights activists
    in the historic civil rights campaign in Albany, Georgia known as
    the Albany Movement.*

-   *In 1952, Hollowell set up a law practice in Atlanta, Georgia, where
    he began to play a major role in the burgeoning civil rights
    struggle.*

-   *Hollowell and civil rights champion C. B.*

In 1952, Hollowell set up a law practice in Atlanta, Georgia, where he
began to play a major role in the burgeoning civil rights struggle.

Hollowell became well known for fighting racial segregation in the State
of Georgia. Hollowell sued the University of Georgia, charging the
institution with racist admission policies. The suit ended in 1961 with
a federal court order demanding the admission of two African-American
students, Charlayne Hunter and Hamilton E. Holmes.

In 1960, Hollowell and co-counsel Horace Ward won a victory in the
Georgia Court of Appeals which secured the release of Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. from the Georgia State Prison. In another case,
Hollowell and members of his firm prevented the execution of a
15-year-old black youth from Monticello, Georgia five days before it was
scheduled to take place. Hollowell and civil rights champion C. B. King
also defended Dr. King and hundreds of civil rights activists in the
historic civil rights campaign in Albany, Georgia known as the Albany
Movement.

In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Hollowell as regional
director of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), a
government agency that monitors workplace discrimination. This
appointment made Hollowell the first black regional director of a major
federal agency. Hollowell remained with the EEOC for nearly 20 years.
Hollowell also served as president of the Voter Education Project, where
he helped increase the number of African-American voters from 3 million
to 5.5 million.

In 2002, the University of Georgia awarded Hollowell its honorary Doctor
of Laws degree.

Personal
========

-   *In 1997, Louise Hollowell and Martin Lehfeldt authored a book
    titled The Sacred Call: A Tribute to Donald L. Hollowell—Civil
    Rights Champion, which chronicles Hollowell's service and
    achievements.*

-   *Hollowell was married to Louise T. Hollowell, a magna cum laude
    graduate of Morris Brown College and a distinguished Professor of
    English (Emeritus) at Morris Brown.*

Hollowell was a dedicated member of Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity. In 1968,
he received the Fraternity's highest honor, the Laurel Wreath Award, for
his work in civil rights.

Hollowell was married to Louise T. Hollowell, a magna cum laude graduate
of Morris Brown College and a distinguished Professor of English
(Emeritus) at Morris Brown. In 1997, Louise Hollowell and Martin
Lehfeldt authored a book titled The Sacred Call: A Tribute to Donald L.
Hollowell—Civil Rights Champion, which chronicles Hollowell's service
and achievements. The book also tells the love story of Donald and
Louise Hollowell, who celebrated their 61st wedding anniversary in 2004.
Attorney and Mrs. Hollowell had no natural children, but were the
godparents to Dr. Albert J. H. Sloan, II, past President of Miles
College (HBCU) outside of Birmingham, Alabama.

Death and legacy
================

-   *Hollowell died on December 27, 2004, eight days after his 87th
    birthday, of heart failure.*

-   *Hollowell is the subject of a 2010 documentary film, Donald L.
    Hollowell: Foot Soldier for Equal Justice, and a full-length
    biography published in 2013 by University of Georgia Press.*

Hollowell died on December 27, 2004, eight days after his 87th birthday,
of heart failure.

To honor him, the City of Atlanta renamed Bankhead Highway (U.S. 78) in
his honor; Emory University named a professorship in his honor, as well.
Hollowell is the subject of a 2010 documentary film, Donald L.
Hollowell: Foot Soldier for Equal Justice, and a full-length biography
published in 2013 by University of Georgia Press.

Footnotes
=========

Further reading
===============

-   *Maurice C. Daniels, Saving the Soul of Georgia: Donald L. Hollowell
    and the Struggle for Civil Rights.*

Maurice C. Daniels, Saving the Soul of Georgia: Donald L. Hollowell and
the Struggle for Civil Rights. Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press,
2013.

External links
==============

-   *Donald L. Hollowell Foundation*

Donald L. Hollowell Foundation
