**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eleftherotypia\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Eleftherotypia
==============

-   *Eleftherotypia (Greek: Ελευθεροτυπία, lit.*

-   *'freedom of the press') was a daily national newspaper published in
    Athens, Greece.*

-   *Following the economic downturn in Greece, the newspaper had to
    file for bankruptcy in 2011.*

Eleftherotypia (Greek: Ελευθεροτυπία, lit. 'freedom of the press') was a
daily national newspaper published in Athens, Greece.

Published since 21 July 1975, it was the first newspaper to appear after
the fall of the Regime of the Colonels, and for most of its time it has
been one of the two most widely circulated newspapers in the country.
Generally taking a center-left, socialist stance, it was highly
respected for its independence and impartiality.

Following the economic downturn in Greece, the newspaper had to file for
bankruptcy in 2011. Briefly taken over by a new publisher, it was
finally shut down in November 2014.

Profile
=======

-   *From the beginning, Eleftherotypia had been an opposition voice
    against the governments of conservative Nea Demokratia party.*

From the beginning, Eleftherotypia had been an opposition voice against
the governments of conservative Nea Demokratia party. Editors often
adopted a social-democratic stance on a number of issues, but more
radical viewpoints are also frequently represented in the paper, to a
notably greater extent than in centre-left daily To Vima. When in 1981,
the socialist PASOK party came into government, it adopted a more
pro-government stance, but remained critical and at times harsh.

History
=======

Foundation
==========

-   *Founded as a cooperative owned by its journalists, it was nicknamed
    "the newspaper with 80 editors-in-chief".*

-   *In the era of Serafim Fintanidis \[el\], who had been
    editor-in-chief from 1976 until 2006, Eleftherotypia sold up to
    160,448 copies and had more than 800 employees.*

Founded as a cooperative owned by its journalists, it was nicknamed "the
newspaper with 80 editors-in-chief". It was however soon taken over by
the Tegopoulos brothers, and was published by businessman Christos
("Kitsos") Tegopoulos, retaining its traditional socialist domestic and
international stance.

In the era of Serafim Fintanidis \[el\], who had been editor-in-chief
from 1976 until 2006, Eleftherotypia sold up to 160,448 copies and had
more than 800 employees.

Bankruptcy
==========

-   *Inmidst the Greek financial crisis, Eleftherotypia was hit hard by
    dwindling revenues.*

-   *The remaining 135 journalists however kept running what remained to
    be the second-largest newspaper of the country.*

Inmidst the Greek financial crisis, Eleftherotypia was hit hard by
dwindling revenues. Because of financial problems, Tegopoulos Publishing
was unable to pay its employees from August 2011. A loan settlement with
Alpha Bank was reached, causing the staff to be sharply cut and the
headquarters to be sold. In October, Alpha Bank however withdrew the
settlement, requiring the publisher to file for bankruptcy. The
remaining 135 journalists however kept running what remained to be the
second-largest newspaper of the country.

Relaunch and final closure
==========================

-   *On 10 January 2013, Eleftherotypia and its internet site Enet were
    relaunched after new publisher Harris Ikonomopoulos had acquired 67%
    of Eleftherotypia’s shares from the Tegopoulos family.*

-   *Under the new publisher, the newspaper however didn't recover.*

-   *In November 2014 the newspaper's operations were finally halted and
    the editors were locked out from the newspaper's website and social
    media accounts.*

On 10 January 2013, Eleftherotypia and its internet site Enet were
relaunched after new publisher Harris Ikonomopoulos had acquired 67% of
Eleftherotypia’s shares from the Tegopoulos family. Under the new
publisher, the newspaper however didn't recover. For nine months, the
editors kept publishing the daily newspaper though not being paid any
wages. They proposed turning the newspaper back into a cooperative, but
Ekonomopoulos turned them down. In November 2014 the newspaper's
operations were finally halted and the editors were locked out from the
newspaper's website and social media accounts.

BBC News described the closure of Eleftherotypia, which it called "a
rare voice of independence and impartiality", as the perhaps most
shocking closure of the Greek media landscape.

Editions
========

Weekend editions
================

-   *The Saturday and Sunday editions of Eleftherotypia, usually
    featured articles by a group of journalists, who collectively use
    the name the "Ios" (Greek "Ιος" meaning "virus").*

-   *The newspaper's Sunday edition Kyriakatiki Eleftherotypia (Greek:
    Κυριακάτικη Ελευθεροτυπία) hosted select articles from Le Monde
    Diplomatique.*

The newspaper's Sunday edition Kyriakatiki Eleftherotypia (Greek:
Κυριακάτικη Ελευθεροτυπία) hosted select articles from Le Monde
Diplomatique. Since 2009, it contained The New York Times International
Weekly supplement, featuring a selection of articles from The New York
Times translated into Greek.

The Saturday and Sunday editions of Eleftherotypia, usually featured
articles by a group of journalists, who collectively use the name the
"Ios" (Greek "Ιος" meaning "virus"). The Ios were known for targeting
and heavily criticizing the Greek far right, the church, the army, the
police and United States foreign policy.

The " 9 " comics magazine
=========================

-   *Every Wednesday, the newspaper features the "9" ("ennea") comics
    magazine, named after the classification of comics as the "ninth
    art".*

-   *The magazine regularly organizes comics exhibitions and every year
    holds a competition for new talents and new creators, through which
    many young Greek comic artists have emerged, such as Helias
    Kyriazes, Tasos Papaioannou, Argyris Mavreas, Katerina Vamvasaki and
    Vasilis Lolos.*

Every Wednesday, the newspaper features the "9" ("ennea") comics
magazine, named after the classification of comics as the "ninth art". 9
enjoys high readership of approximately 200,000 readers weekly. The
magazine regularly organizes comics exhibitions and every year holds a
competition for new talents and new creators, through which many young
Greek comic artists have emerged, such as Helias Kyriazes, Tasos
Papaioannou, Argyris Mavreas, Katerina Vamvasaki and Vasilis Lolos.

Each issue usually features an ongoing "central story" which usually
takes up four or five consecutive issues, a science-fiction short story
and various comics, strips and caricatures. Since the beginning of the
magazine's publication, in June 2000, no issue has been published
without a woman on its front page.

Daily political cartoons were provided by Kostas Koufogiorgos and
Vaggeli Papavasiliou.

Controversy
===========

-   *Other Greek left wing radical and terrorist organizations, such as
    ELA, as well as small militant anarchist groups, also send their
    communiques exclusively to Eleftherotypia, under the assumption that
    the newspaper, while unlikely to be directly supportive, would be
    more likely to publicise their views.*

In April 1977, Revolutionary Organization 17 November (17N) sent a
manifesto to Eleftherotypia, titled "Reply to the parties and groups"
("Απάντηση στα κόμματα και τις οργανώσεις"). The preface of the
manifesto stated that Eleftherotypia was chosen because "a) it reported
with respect to the facts of the attacks and b) gave voice to the full
spectrum of the Left, even when not accepting its causes". This was the
beginning of a trend that continued for almost every such action 17
November undertook, up until the organization's capture in 2002. Other
Greek left wing radical and terrorist organizations, such as ELA, as
well as small militant anarchist groups, also send their communiques
exclusively to Eleftherotypia, under the assumption that the newspaper,
while unlikely to be directly supportive, would be more likely to
publicise their views.

The newspaper became known for its policy of publishing the
proclamations of such groups without criticism. Until 2002 it abstained
from condemning terrorist attacks, including assassinations. In the
past, some Eleftherotypia editors have also criticised counter terrorism
laws, with some perceiving this as evidence that the publication was
supportive of terrorism.

In November 2005, the Court of Appeals in Athens found the publisher
Tegopoulos Publishing, as well as editor-in-chief Serafim Fintanidis and
another 2 persons guilty of slandering the Public Prosecutor of the
trial of the 17N terrorist group, District Attorney Christos Lambrou.
They were fined Euro 60,000 each to be paid to Mr. Lambrou.

See also
========

-   *List of newspapers in Greece*

-   *Politics of Greece*

Politics of Greece

List of newspapers in Greece

Notes
=====

External links
==============

-   *Ios Website ‹See Tfd›(in Greek)*

Ios Website ‹See Tfd›(in Greek)
