**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emporis\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Emporis
=======

-   *Emporis GmbH is a real estate data mining company with headquarters
    in Hamburg, Germany.*

-   *Emporis previously focused exclusively on high-rise buildings and
    skyscrapers, which it defines as buildings "between 35 and 100
    metres" tall and "at least 100 metres tall", respectively.*

-   *Emporis offers a variety of information on its public database,
    Emporis.com, located at www.emporis.com.*

Emporis GmbH is a real estate data mining company with headquarters in
Hamburg, Germany. The company collects and publishes data and
photographs of buildings worldwide.

Emporis offers a variety of information on its public database,
Emporis.com, located at www.emporis.com. Emporis is frequently cited by
various media sources as an authority on building data.

Emporis previously focused exclusively on high-rise buildings and
skyscrapers, which it defines as buildings "between 35 and 100 metres"
tall and "at least 100 metres tall", respectively. Today, the database
has expanded to include low-rise buildings and other structures.

History
=======

-   *In 2000 he started skyscrapers.com which was folded into Emporis
    in 2003.*

-   *In 2005 Emporis formed a partnership with the Council on Tall
    Buildings and Urban Habitat (CTBUH), under which Emporis served as
    the official CTBUH high-rise buildings database until the launch of
    The Skyscraper Center in 2011.*

Michael Wutzke started a website about skyscrapers in Frankfurt in 1996.
In 2000 he started skyscrapers.com which was folded into Emporis in
2003.

In 2004, Stephan R. Boehm assumed the role of Chairman. Wutzke was Chief
Technology Officer and managing director until 2010, when he left the
company. Since then, Daniel Gr√∂zinger and Sven Schmidt are managing
directors at Emporis

In 2005 Emporis formed a partnership with the Council on Tall Buildings
and Urban Habitat (CTBUH), under which Emporis served as the official
CTBUH high-rise buildings database until the launch of The Skyscraper
Center in 2011.

In 2007 venture capital firm Neuhaus Partners and KfW Bankengruppe
invested several million Euro in the company. Effective January 1, 2009,
the company moved its headquarters from Darmstadt to Frankfurt. In 2011,
the company moved from Frankfurt to Hamburg.

Emporis Skyscraper Award
========================

-   *In 2000 a group of Emporis senior editors began presenting the
    Emporis Skyscraper Award.*

-   *Also see: Emporis Skyscraper Award.*

Also see: Emporis Skyscraper Award.

In 2000 a group of Emporis senior editors began presenting the Emporis
Skyscraper Award. Eligible buildings are selected from a list of all
buildings in the world at least 100 meters tall which were completed
that year.

See also
========

-   *SkyscraperPage*

-   *Structurae*

SkyscraperPage

Structurae

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Emporis.com*

Emporis.com
