**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eric\_Solorio\_Academy\_High\_School\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Eric Solorio Academy High School
================================

-   *Solorio is part of the Chicago Public Schools district and is
    managed by the Academy for Urban School Leadership (AUSL).*

-   *Eric Solorio Academy High School is a public 4-year high school
    located in the Gage Park neighborhood on the Southwest side of
    Chicago, IL.*

Eric Solorio Academy High School is a public 4-year high school located
in the Gage Park neighborhood on the Southwest side of Chicago, IL.
Solorio is part of the Chicago Public Schools district and is managed by
the Academy for Urban School Leadership (AUSL).

History
=======

-   *Eric Solorio Academy High School was named after Chicago Police
    Officer Eric Solorio, who died of injuries and suffered in a car
    accident while on patrol in 2006.*

-   *The school opened with grade 9 and has added a grade each school
    year.*

-   *Solorio Academy was ranked as top 20 public high school in
    Chicago.*

Eric Solorio Academy High School was named after Chicago Police Officer
Eric Solorio, who died of injuries and suffered in a car accident while
on patrol in 2006. Officer Solorio was raised in the southwest side of
Chicago and was on-track to graduate from Loyola University Chicago with
a degree in Spanish (awarded posthumously). Solorio Academy High School
opened in 2010 due to rapid growth in the student population of the
Southwest side. Solorio Academy was ranked as top 20 public high school
in Chicago.

The building is “Gold” level certified under the U.S. Green Building
Council’s Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design schools’ rating
system, and includes a green roof covering 40 percent of the building.
It was the first to implement CPS’s Urban Model High School (UMHS)
design and was part of the Modern Schools Across Chicago (MSAC) program.
The building contains more than 200,000 square feet and includes
science, computer, visual and performing arts classrooms, as well as a
library, a gymnasium, a swimming pool and playing fields and tennis
courts. The school opened with grade 9 and has added a grade each school
year. In June 2014, Solorio celebrated its first graduating class.

Academics
=========

-   *Their 4-year cohort graduation rate was 89.2%, and their culture
    and climate was deemed "Well Organized" according to the results of
    the My School, My Voice 5 Essentials survey from the University of
    Chicago Consortium on Chicago School Research.*

-   *Solorio also was designated "Strong" in the Creative Schools
    Certification program.*

Solorio offers a college preparatory curriculum, including a Advanced
Placement Courses in English Language, English Literature, Environmental
Science, Human Geography, US History, Psychology, Spanish Language,
Spanish Literature, Biology, Physics, Calculus, Statistics, and Art. In
addition to core content, each department offers a variety of electives.
Solorio also was designated "Strong" in the Creative Schools
Certification program.

In 2014, Solorio's ACT Composite average score was 18.9. Their 4-year
cohort graduation rate was 89.2%, and their culture and climate was
deemed "Well Organized" according to the results of the My School, My
Voice 5 Essentials survey from the University of Chicago Consortium on
Chicago School Research.

Athletics
=========

-   *The boys' soccer team earned its first school's state championship
    with a 6-0 victory against Gibault Catholic High School in the 2017
    IHSA 2A state championship.*

The boys' soccer team earned its first school's state championship with
a 6-0 victory against Gibault Catholic High School in the 2017 IHSA 2A
state championship.

Boys
====

-   *Lacrosse*

-   *Football*

-   *Cross Country*

-   *Basketball*

-   *Baseball*

-   *Bowling*

-   *Soccer*

Baseball

Basketball

Bowling

Cross Country

Football

Lacrosse

Soccer

Swimming

Tennis

Track & Field

Volleyball

Water Polo

Wrestling

Girls
=====

-   *Lacrosse*

-   *Basketball*

-   *Pom Pom*

-   *Cross Country*

-   *Cheerleading*

-   *Bowling*

-   *Soccer*

Basketball

Bowling

Cheerleading

Cross Country

Lacrosse

Pom Pom

Soccer

Softball

16" Softball

Swimming

Tennis

Track & Field

Volleyball

Water Polo

Clubs and activities
====================

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Solorio Athletics Webpage*

Official website

Solorio Athletics Webpage
