**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executive%20Order%2013780\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Executive Order 13780
=====================

-   *Executive Order 13780, titled Protecting the Nation from Foreign
    Terrorist Entry into the United States, is an executive order signed
    by United States President Donald Trump on March 6, 2017.*

-   *This executive order revoked and replaced Executive Order 13769
    issued on January 27, 2017, and has subsequently been revised by two
    presidential proclamations.*

Executive Order 13780, titled Protecting the Nation from Foreign
Terrorist Entry into the United States, is an executive order signed by
United States President Donald Trump on March 6, 2017. It places limits
on travel to the U.S. from five Muslim-majority countries (Iran, Libya,
Syria, Yemen, Somalia) as well as North Korea and Venezuela, and also
bars entry for all refugees who do not possess either a visa or valid
travel documents. This executive order revoked and replaced Executive
Order 13769 issued on January 27, 2017, and has subsequently been
revised by two presidential proclamations. Court rulings prohibited some
of its key provisions from being enforced between March 15 and December
4, 2017, and the Supreme Court upheld the most recent version of the
travel ban on June 26, 2018.

As of the most recent revision in April 2018, travel is banned on
tourist or business visas for nationals of Libya and Yemen, as well as
some government officials of Venezuela; on all, except student and
exchange visitor visas, for nationals of Iran; on immigrant visas for
nationals of Somalia; and for all travel for nationals of North Korea
and Syria.

Despite the order intended to be more lax towards immigration and asylum
laws, the order was still challenged in court by several states. On
March 15, 2017, Judge Derrick Watson of the District Court for the
District of Hawaii issued a temporary restraining order enjoining the
government from enforcing several key provisions of the order (Sections
2 and 6). By taking into account evidence beyond the words of the
executive order itself, the judge reasoned the executive order was
likely motivated by anti-Muslim sentiment and thus breached the
Establishment Clause of the United States Constitution. On the same
date, Judge Theodore Chuang of the District Court for the District of
Maryland reached a similar conclusion (enjoining Section 2(c) only). The
Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit refused on May 25, 2017, to
reinstate the ban, citing religious discrimination. On June 26, 2017,
the Supreme Court partially lifted the halt and agreed to hear oral
arguments for the petition to vacate the injunctions in October. On
September 24, 2017, President Trump signed Presidential Proclamation
9645, further expanding and defining the previous Executive Order. In
response, the Supreme Court canceled its hearing, then granted the
government's request to declare the Maryland case moot and vacate that
judgment. On December 4, the Supreme Court allowed the ban to go into
full effect, pending legal challenges. On June 26, 2018, the Supreme
Court upheld the president's authority to implement these restrictions
in the case of Trump v. Hawaii.

Provisions and effect
=====================

-   *Trump has called the new order a "watered down, politically correct
    version" of the prior executive order.*

-   *At 12:01am EDT on March 16, 2017, Executive Order 13780 revoked and
    replaced Executive Order 13769.*

-   *The order would reduce the number of refugees to be admitted into
    the United States (in 2017) to 50,000 and suspend the U.S.*

At 12:01am EDT on March 16, 2017, Executive Order 13780 revoked and
replaced Executive Order 13769. Trump has called the new order a
"watered down, politically correct version" of the prior executive
order.

Sections 2 and 6 were enjoined by Judge Watson's temporary restraining
order in Hawaii v. Trump before they could take effect. Among other
things, Section 6 would set the number of admissible refugees and
Section 2 would prohibit immigration from six countries. Section 15(a)
contemplates that even if part(s) of the executive order are held
invalid, other parts of the order still go into effect. The order would
reduce the number of refugees to be admitted into the United States (in
2017) to 50,000 and suspend the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP)
for 120 days, after which the program would be conditionally resumed for
individual countries. The order would direct some cabinet secretaries to
suspend entry of nationals from countries who do not meet adjudication
standards under the Immigration and Nationality Act. The Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) lists these countries as Iran, Libya, Somalia,
Sudan, Syria, and Yemen. Iraq was removed from the list included in
Executive Order 13769.

On May 4, 2017, the United States Department of State proposed a new
form, DS-5535, to collect additional information from all visa
applicants "who have been determined to warrant additional scrutiny in
connection with terrorism or other national security-related visa
ineligibilities". The new form implemented the directive of Executive
Order 13780 to implement additional protocols and procedures focusing on
"\[ensuring\] the proper collection of all information necessary to
rigorously evaluate all grounds of inadmissibility or deportability, or
grounds for the denial of other immigration benefits". The public was
given fourteen days to comment on the proposed form. 55 academic and
scientific organizations cosigned a letter, stating that while they
appreciate and support the nation's security needs, the proposed form
"is likely to have a chilling effect" on all travelers to the United
States due to uncertainties and confusion regarding the supplemental
questions and by delaying processing travelers who have strict deadlines
and enrollment dates. The organizations said the form was unclear in the
criteria for determining who would complete the form, the impact of
unintentional incomplete disclosure of information, methods to
correcting information initially provided, and how and for how long the
information would be stored and kept private.

Section 3: Scope and implementation of the suspension
=====================================================

-   *Section 3 outlines many exceptions to suspensions of immigration
    that the order requires.*

Section 3 outlines many exceptions to suspensions of immigration that
the order requires.

Exceptions
==========

-   *The order does not apply to international travelers from the named
    countries who are:*

The order does not apply to international travelers from the named
countries who are:

Case-by-case determinations
===========================

-   *The order allows exceptions to the entry ban to be reviewed on a
    case-by-case basis for the DHS and the Department of State to issue
    waivers or approval of a visa for travelers from the countries of
    concern stated in the order.*

-   *The order allows case-by-case waivers if:*

The order allows exceptions to the entry ban to be reviewed on a
case-by-case basis for the DHS and the Department of State to issue
waivers or approval of a visa for travelers from the countries of
concern stated in the order. The order allows case-by-case waivers if:

Section 8: Expedited completion of the biometric entry–exit tracking system
===========================================================================

-   *Under Section 8 of Executive Order 13780, the head of DHS must
    "expedite the completion and implementation of a biometric
    entry–exit tracking system for in-scope travelers to the United
    States, as recommended by the National Commission on Terrorist
    Attacks Upon the United States."*

Under Section 8 of Executive Order 13780, the head of DHS must "expedite
the completion and implementation of a biometric entry–exit tracking
system for in-scope travelers to the United States, as recommended by
the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States."
Gary Leff, an airline-industry expert, referring to a 2016 DHS
publication, believes it is likely the term "in-scope" refers to all
non-U.S. citizens within the ages of 14 and 79, which Leff believes will
increase the costs (money and time) of air travel perhaps due to
fingerprinting requirements for all such people who travel into the U.S.

Statutory authorization and related statutory prohibitions
==========================================================

-   *The order cites paragraph (f) of Title 8 of the United States Code
    § 1182 which discusses inadmissible aliens.*

-   *When Judge Chuang enjoined part of the executive order, he based
    his decision in part on paragraph (a) of Title 8 of the United
    States Code § 1152, which discusses impermissible discrimination
    when granting immigrant visas:*

The order cites paragraph (f) of Title 8 of the United States Code
§ 1182 which discusses inadmissible aliens. Paragraph (f) states:

When Judge Chuang enjoined part of the executive order, he based his
decision in part on paragraph (a) of Title 8 of the United States Code
§ 1152, which discusses impermissible discrimination when granting
immigrant visas:

Subsequent presidential proclamations
=====================================

-   *Presidential proclamations have been used within the framework of
    Executive Order 13780 to alter some of its aspects, most notable the
    list of countries affected.*

Presidential proclamations have been used within the framework of
Executive Order 13780 to alter some of its aspects, most notable the
list of countries affected.

Presidential Proclamation 9645
==============================

-   *Enforcement of the orders, barring the enforcement of the
    proclamation in part, from the Court of Appeals for the Fourth and
    Ninth Circuit were stayed by the United States Supreme Court on
    December 4, 2017, in a 7–2 decision effectively revoking the lower
    courts' decisions against the President.*

-   *On October 18, 2017, a federal judge ruled that President Trump's
    public comments strongly indicated that national security is not the
    primary goal of the travel ban.*

Presidential Proclamation 9645 was signed by President Donald Trump on
September 24, 2017, and restricts entry into the US for certain
categories of people from eight countries, not all of which were on the
original list. Chad, North Korea, and Venezuela were new to the travel
restrictions list, while Sudan was removed.

The State of Hawaii filed a lawsuit in federal court to stop
Presidential Proclamation 9645 from taking effect. On October 17, 2017,
a federal judge determined that Presidential Proclamation 9645 "lacks
sufficient findings that the entry of more than 150 million nationals
from \[the\] six specified countries would be 'detrimental to the
interests of the United States'". The federal judge granted a temporary
restraining order, preventing Presidential Proclamation 9645 from taking
effect on all countries mentioned, except for North Korea and Venezuela,
the next day.

American Civil Liberties Union's Immigrants' Rights Project also filed a
lawsuit to prevent Presidential Proclamation 9645 from taking effect. On
October 18, 2017, a federal judge ruled that President Trump's public
comments strongly indicated that national security is not the primary
goal of the travel ban. Determining that President Trump may have
intended to violate the constitutional prohibition on religious
preferences when issuing Presidential Proclamation 9645, the federal
judge ruled that the federal government could not enforce the travel ban
on people from all countries mentioned, except for North Korea and
Venezuela.

Enforcement of the orders, barring the enforcement of the proclamation
in part, from the Court of Appeals for the Fourth and Ninth Circuit were
stayed by the United States Supreme Court on December 4, 2017, in a 7–2
decision effectively revoking the lower courts' decisions against the
President.

Presidential Proclamation 9723
==============================

-   *On April 10, 2018, a proclamation removed the travel restrictions
    on Chad.*

On April 10, 2018, a proclamation removed the travel restrictions on
Chad.

Current status of restrictions
==============================

Legal challenges
================

Challenges to Executive Order 13780
===================================

Hawaii v. Trump
===============

-   *On March 7, 2017, the State of Hawaii brought a civil action
    challenging the executive order, asking for declaratory judgment and
    an injunction halting the order.*

-   *On March 15, 2017, United States District Judge Derrick Watson
    issued a temporary restraining order preventing sections 2 and 6 of
    Executive Order 13780 from going into effect.*

-   *On March 29, 2017, Judge Watson extended his order blocking the ban
    for a longer duration.*

On March 7, 2017, the State of Hawaii brought a civil action challenging
the executive order, asking for declaratory judgment and an injunction
halting the order. The State of Hawaii moved for leave to file an
Amended Complaint pertaining to Executive Order 13780. Doug Chin,
Hawaii's Attorney General, publicly stated, "This new executive order is
nothing more than Muslim Ban 2.0. Under the pretense of national
security, it still targets immigrants and refugees. It leaves the door
open for even further restrictions.” Hawaii's legal challenge to the
revised ban cites top White House advisor Stephen Miller as saying the
revised travel ban is meant to achieve the same basic policy outcome as
the original.

The Amended Complaint lists eight specific causes of action pertaining
to Executive Order 13780:

Violation of the First Amendment Establishment Clause claiming the
travel ban targets Muslims

Violation of the Fifth Amendment Equal Protection Clause

Violation of the Fifth Amendment Substantive Due Process clause

Violation of the Fifth Amendment Procedural Due Process clause

Violation of the Immigration and Nationality Act 8
U.S.C. § 1152(a)(1)(A), 8 U.S.C. § 1182(f) and 8 U.S.C. § 1185(a)

Violations of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act 42
U.S.C. § 2000bb1(a)

Substantive Violation of the Administrative Procedure Act through
Violations of the Constitution, Immigration and Nationality Act, and
Arbitrary and Capricious Action 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A)–(C).

Procedural Violation of the Administrative Procedure Act 5
U.S.C. § 706(2)(D), 5 U.S.C. § 551(1), and 5 U.S.C. § 553

On March 15, 2017, United States District Judge Derrick Watson issued a
temporary restraining order preventing sections 2 and 6 of Executive
Order 13780 from going into effect. In his order, Judge Watson ruled
that the State of Hawaii showed a strong likelihood of success on their
Establishment Clause claim in asserting that Executive Order 13780 was
in fact a "Muslim ban". Judge Watson stated in his ruling, "When
considered alongside the constitutional injuries and harms discussed
above, and the questionable evidence supporting the Government’s
national security motivations, the balance of equities and public
interests justify granting the Plaintiffs. Nationwide relief is
appropriate in light of the likelihood of success on the Establishment
Clause claim." He also stated, concerning the Order's neutrality to
religion, that the government's position that Courts may not look behind
the exercise of executive discretion and must only review the text of
the Order was rejected as being legally incorrect,:31-32 and that:

In drawing its conclusion, the Court further quoted the Ninth Circuit
appeal ruling on the original Executive Order (13769): "It is well
established that evidence of purpose beyond the face of the challenged
law may be considered in evaluating Establishment and Equal Protection
Clause claims", and quoted in support of its findings, previous rulings
that "Official action that targets religious conduct for distinctive
treatment cannot be shielded by mere compliance with the requirement of
facial neutrality" (Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah);
"a facially neutral statute violated the Establishment Clause in light
of legislative history demonstrating an intent to apply regulations only
to minority religions" (Larson v. Valente); and that "circumstantial
evidence of intent, including the historical background of the decision
and statements by decision makers, may be considered in evaluating
whether a governmental action was motivated by a discriminatory purpose"
(Village of Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing); ending with a
comment that "the Supreme Court has been even more emphatic: courts may
not 'turn a blind eye to the context in which \[a\] policy arose'"
(McCreary County v. ACLU of Kentucky, ruled that a law becomes
unconstitutional under the Establishment Clause if its "ostensible or
predominant purpose" is to favor or disfavor any religion over any
other).:32 The Court also took into account numerous statements by the
President and his team prior to and since election, which had directly
stated that he sought a legal means to achieve a total ban on Muslims
entering the United States,:33–37 and a "dearth" of substantive evidence
in support of the stated security benefits.

After Judge Watson's ruling, a Department of Justice spokeswoman said
the administration will continue to defend the executive order in the
courts. President Trump denounced the ruling as "an unprecedented
judicial overreach", and indicated that the decision would be appealed,
if necessary to the Supreme Court, stating that, "We're talking about
the safety of our nation, the safety and security of our people. This
ruling makes us look weak."

Judge Alex Kozinski of the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals filed a late
dissent on March 17, 2017, to the Ninth Circuit's opinion in Washington
v. Trump arguing against the State of Washington’s Establishment Clause
claims on grounds that Trump’s speech during the campaign was political
speech protected by the First Amendment. Even though the Ninth Circuit
had declined to address that issue in reaching its ruling on Washington
v. Trump and US courts do not typically rule on issues that are not
before them, Kozinski argued it was appropriate for him to address the
issue because District Judge Watson in Hawaii had cited the Ninth
Circuit opinion in reaching its Establishment Clause ruling.

On March 29, 2017, Judge Watson extended his order blocking the ban for
a longer duration. The Department of Justice appealed this ruling. On
May 15, a panel of the Ninth Circuit heard arguments on whether to
uphold the nationwide injunction. Acting Solicitor General of the United
States Jeffrey Wall and Hawaii's attorney, Neal Katyal, appeared before
Circuit Judges Ronald M. Gould, Michael Daly Hawkins, and Richard Paez
for an hour of oral arguments in Seattle's William Kenzo Nakamura United
States Courthouse.

On June 12, 2017, a unanimous panel of the Ninth Circuit partially
upheld Judge Watson's injunction. In its anonymous per curiam decision,
the court found President Trump's order violated the relevant statute,
and so must be enjoined. However, the court found Judge Watson should
have avoided the constitutional question, and that he should not have
enjoined the purely internal government vetting review.

On June 19, 2017, Judge Watson complied with the decision of the Ninth
Circuit and curtailed the injunction such that the injunction would
exempt, "internal review procedures that do not burden individuals
outside of the executive branch of the federal government."

International Refugee Assistance Project v. Trump
=================================================

-   *The basis of Judge Chuang's order is violation of the Establishment
    Clause of the United States Constitution.*

-   *On May 25, the Fourth Circuit upheld the March ruling of the
    Maryland district court, continuing the block of the travel ban by a
    vote of 10-3 because it violated the Establishment Clause of the
    United States Constitution.*

On the same date that Judge Watson in Hawaii blocked parts of the order
Judge Theodore D. Chuang of the U.S. District of Maryland, who was
formerly Deputy General Counsel for the Department of Homeland Security,
issued a temporary restraining order that blocked the revised executive
order's section 2(c), which would have banned travel to the U.S. by
citizens from six designated countries. The basis of Judge Chuang's
order is violation of the Establishment Clause of the United States
Constitution. Judge Chuang also noted that the order was in violation of
the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965, which modifies the
Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 to say "No person shall receive
any preference or priority or be discriminated against in the issuance
of an immigrant visa because of his race, sex, nationality, place of
birth, or place of residence," but only in that it placed a ban on
immigrant visa issuance based on nationality. Judge Chuang noted that
the statute does not prohibit the President from barring entry into the
United States or the issuance of non-immigrant visas on the basis of
nationality. The Trump Administration appealed the ruling to the United
States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which scheduled oral
argument for May 8; the Justice Department has said it will file a
motion to encourage the court to rule sooner. On March 31, approximately
30 top U.S. universities filed an amicus brief with the Fourth Circuit
opposing the travel ban.

On May 8, acting Solicitor General of the United States Jeffrey Wall and
American Civil Liberties Union attorney Omar Jadwat appeared before the
13-judge en banc Fourth Circuit for two hours of oral arguments in
Richmond, Virginia's Lewis F. Powell Jr. United States Courthouse.
Judges J. Harvie Wilkinson III, whose daughter is married to Wall, and
Allyson Kay Duncan recused themselves.

On May 25, the Fourth Circuit upheld the March ruling of the Maryland
district court, continuing the block of the travel ban by a vote of 10-3
because it violated the Establishment Clause of the United States
Constitution.

The acting Solicitor General next applied for a stay of execution from
the Supreme Court of the United States, which then scheduled all
briefing to be concluded by June 21, the day before the Court's last
conference of the term. Hawaii's outside counsel in a related case, Neal
Katyal, told the Court he was "in Utah with very little internet access"
for the rest of the week, so it granted him an extra day to file the
state's response brief.

Washington v. Trump
===================

-   *The Court subsequently issued an order directing the United States
    to file a response to the emergency motion to enforce the
    preliminary injunction by March 14, 2017.*

-   *The State of Washington also asked the Court to declare that
    sections 2(c) and 6(a) of the second Executive Order (13780) are
    unauthorized by and contrary to the Constitution and laws of the
    United States, and that the United States should also be enjoined
    from implementing or enforcing sections 2(c) and 6(a) of the second
    Executive Order, including at all United States borders, ports of
    entry, and in the issuance of visas, and enjoin the United States
    from implementing or enforcing section 5(d) of the first Executive
    Order and enjoin the United States from implementing or enforcing
    section 6(b) of the second Executive Order.*

On the day the order was signed, March 6, 2017, Washington Attorney
General Bob Ferguson stated that he had not yet had sufficient time to
review it.

On March 9, Ferguson indicated that the State of Washington will pursue
obtaining a temporary restraining order and a preliminary injunction to
block the executive order. Ferguson publicly stated, "It's my duty, my
responsibility to act. We're not going to be bullied by threats and
actions by the federal government". The State of Washington indicated
they would ask for a temporary restraining order and a preliminary
injunction in the current proceedings related to Executive Order 13769
by asking the Court for leave to file an amended complaint to address
Executive Order 13780. Ferguson also indicated that the states of
Oregon, Massachusetts, and New York would ask for leave from the Court
to join the current lawsuit against the executive order.

On March 9, 2017, White House press secretary Sean Spicer responded to
the criticism of the order from several state attorneys general, and
stated that the White House was confident the new order addressed the
issues raised by the states in litigation involving the previous
Executive Order 13769. Spicer stated, "I think we feel very comfortable
that the executive order that was crafted is consistent with—we’re going
to go forward on this—but I think by all means, I don’t—we feel very
confident with how that was crafted and the input that was given”.

The federal defendants argued the new order “does not limit the
\[federal\] government’s ability to immediately begin enforcing the new
executive order”, while the State of Washington has replied that “While
the provisions differ slightly from their original incarnation, the
differences do not remove them from the ambit of this court's
injunction”. As of the evening of March 10, neither side had filed a
motion to uphold or stop the new order, and Judge Robart said he would
not rule on the matter without one.

On March 13, 2017, the Washington State Attorney General filed a second
amended complaint addressing Executive Order 13780 and moved the court
to enjoin enforcement of the order under the current preliminary
injunction previously issued which barred enforcement of Executive Order
13769 by filing a motion for emergency enforcement of the preliminary
injunction. The State of Washington in their second amended complaint
asked the Court to declare that sections 3(c), 5(a)–(c), and 5(e) of the
first Executive Order (13769) are unauthorized by, and contrary to, the
Constitution and laws of the United States, and that the United States
should be enjoined from implementing or enforcing sections 3(c),
5(a)–(c), and 5(e) of the first Executive Order, including at all United
States borders, ports of entry, and in the issuance of visas, pending
further orders from this Court. The State of Washington also asked the
Court to declare that sections 2(c) and 6(a) of the second Executive
Order (13780) are unauthorized by and contrary to the Constitution and
laws of the United States, and that the United States should also be
enjoined from implementing or enforcing sections 2(c) and 6(a) of the
second Executive Order, including at all United States borders, ports of
entry, and in the issuance of visas, and enjoin the United States from
implementing or enforcing section 5(d) of the first Executive Order and
enjoin the United States from implementing or enforcing section 6(b) of
the second Executive Order. The Court subsequently issued an order
directing the United States to file a response to the emergency motion
to enforce the preliminary injunction by March 14, 2017.

On March 17, 2017, U.S. District Judge James Robart declined to grant an
additional restraining order because he regarded such an action as
unnecessary given that the President's new executive order was already
blocked by U.S. District Judge Derrick Watson in Hawaii.

Maryland will also challenge the order in court, citing the order's
future harm to its competitiveness academically and economically in the
form of hindering visits by academics, scientists and engineers from
other countries.

Other cases
===========

-   *On March 24, 2017, U.S. District Judge Anthony John Trenga in
    Alexandria, Virginia, refused to grant plaintiff Linda Sarsour a
    temporary restraining order against the President's executive order,
    finding that she was not likely to succeed in her challenge.*

-   *The first temporary restraining order (TRO) issued against the
    revised travel ban came on March 10 from U.S. district judge William
    Conley in Madison, Wisconsin; the TRO suspended the executive order
    with respect to a Syrian refugee's wife and child who are living in
    Aleppo, Syria.*

The first temporary restraining order (TRO) issued against the revised
travel ban came on March 10 from U.S. district judge William Conley in
Madison, Wisconsin; the TRO suspended the executive order with respect
to a Syrian refugee's wife and child who are living in Aleppo, Syria.

On March 24, 2017, U.S. District Judge Anthony John Trenga in
Alexandria, Virginia, refused to grant plaintiff Linda Sarsour a
temporary restraining order against the President's executive order,
finding that she was not likely to succeed in her challenge.

U.S. Supreme Court
==================

-   *On September 24, 2017, Trump signed the new Presidential
    Proclamation replacing and expanding the March Executive Order.*

-   *On October 10, 2017, the Supreme Court did so with regard to the
    Fourth Circuit case.*

-   *After Judge Watson's order allowing refugee resettlements was then
    affirmed on appeal, the Supreme Court, on September 12, 2017, issued
    a stay blocking the order indefinitely.*

On June 26, 2017, in an unsigned per curiam decision, the United States
Supreme Court stayed the lower court injunctions as applied to those who
have no "credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or
entity in the United States" The Court also granted certiorari and set
oral arguments for the fall term. The Court did not clarify on what
constitutes a bona fide relationship. Justice Thomas, joined by Justices
Alito, and Gorsuch, partially dissented, writing that the lower courts'
entire injunctions against the executive order should be stayed.

On June 29, President Trump sent out a diplomatic cable to embassies and
consulates seeking to define what qualifies as a "bona fide
relationship", excluding connections with refugee resettlement agencies,
and clarifying that step-siblings and half-siblings are close family
while grandparents and nephews are not.

On July 14 in Honolulu, Judge Derrick Watson found that the President's
limitations on refugee resettlement agencies and family definitions
violated the Supreme Court's order, writing "grandparents are the
epitome of close family members." On July 19, the Supreme Court left in
place Judge Watson's order on family definitions, but it stayed while on
appeal the part of his injunction on refugee resettlement agencies.
Justices Thomas, Alito, and Gorsuch said they would have stayed Judge
Watson's entire order. The Court also scheduled oral arguments in the
case for October 10. After Judge Watson's order allowing refugee
resettlements was then affirmed on appeal, the Supreme Court, on
September 12, 2017, issued a stay blocking the order indefinitely.

On September 24, 2017, Trump signed the new Presidential Proclamation
replacing and expanding the March Executive Order. The Supreme Court
canceled its hearing, and Solicitor General Noel Francisco then asked
the Court to declare the case moot and also vacate the lower courts'
judgments. On October 10, 2017, the Supreme Court did so with regard to
the Fourth Circuit case. Justice Sonia Sotomayor dissented, saying the
Court should not vacate the judgment below but only dismiss their review
as improvidently granted. The Court took no action on the Ninth Circuit
case, which addressed the President's refugee ban that expired on
October 24.

The Supreme Court allowed the travel ban to go into full effect on
December 4, pending legal challenges. Seven of the nine justices lifted
the injunctions imposed by the lower courts, while two justices wanted
the order to be blocked.

On December 22, 2017, a three-judge panel of United States Court of
Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, ruled that President Trump's Executive
Order “exceeds the scope of his delegated authority,” to deem classes of
people by their National Origin ineligible to enter the country under
the Immigration and Nationality Act.

Challenges to Presidential Proclamation 9645
============================================

U.S. District Courts
====================

-   *Plaintiffs in the Hawaii v. Trump and Int'l Refugee Assistance
    Project v. Trump litigations amended their complaints to challenge
    Presidential Proclamation 9645.*

-   *On October 17, 2017, Judge Derrick Watson granted Hawaii's motion
    for a temporary restraining order against most of the Proclamation
    on the grounds it violated immigration statutes.*

Plaintiffs in the Hawaii v. Trump and Int'l Refugee Assistance Project
v. Trump litigations amended their complaints to challenge Presidential
Proclamation 9645. On October 17, 2017, Judge Derrick Watson granted
Hawaii's motion for a temporary restraining order against most of the
Proclamation on the grounds it violated immigration statutes. The next
day, Judge Theodore D. Chuang in Maryland issued a nationwide injunction
prohibiting enforcement of the Proclamation against those with a bona
fide relationship to the United States on the grounds it violated the
United States Constitution.

On December 4, the Supreme Court issued an order allowing the September
Proclamation to take effect, blocking all the lower court decisions from
taking effect until after the Supreme Court rules on the matter, and
encouraging both appeals courts to "render its decision with appropriate
dispatch." Justices Ginsburg and Sotomayor voted against the brief,
unsigned orders.

U.S. Courts of Appeals
======================

-   *The Circuit Courts' judgments remained stayed by the December 4
    Supreme Court order.*

-   *On December 22, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the Hawaiian injunction
    against the Proclamation but limiting it to those with a bona fide
    relationship to the United States.*

-   *In his dissent, Judge Paul V. Niemeyer argued that the majority
    erred by considering comments made by President Trump.*

On December 22, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the Hawaiian injunction
against the Proclamation but limiting it to those with a bona fide
relationship to the United States.

On February 15, 2018, the en banc Fourth Circuit affirmed the Maryland
injunction against the Proclamation by a vote of 9-4. Chief Judge Roger
Gregory, writing for the majority, found that the Proclamation likely
violated the Establishment Clause of the U.S. Constitution. In his
dissent, Judge Paul V. Niemeyer argued that the majority erred by
considering comments made by President Trump. Judge William Byrd Traxler
Jr., who had joined the circuit majority in May, now dissented. The
Circuit Courts' judgments remained stayed by the December 4 Supreme
Court order.

Supreme Court
=============

-   *On January 19, 2018, the Supreme Court granted the government's
    petition for a writ of certiorari in the Trump v. Hawaii case,
    appealing the Ninth Circuit decision.*

-   *Oral hearings for Trump v. Hawaii (Docket 17-965) were heard on
    April 25, 2018, the first time that the Supreme Court had a hearing
    related to any version of the travel ban.*

On January 19, 2018, the Supreme Court granted the government's petition
for a writ of certiorari in the Trump v. Hawaii case, appealing the
Ninth Circuit decision. Oral hearings for Trump v. Hawaii (Docket
17-965) were heard on April 25, 2018, the first time that the Supreme
Court had a hearing related to any version of the travel ban. Observers
of the session believed that the five conservative judges sided with the
government in enforcing the ban. The Court as a whole asked questions
seeking to determine whether the ban equated to religious discrimination
and whether it was within the President's power.

On June 26, 2018, the Court handed down its 5-4 decision which nullified
the District Court's injunction. The majority opinion, written by Chief
Justice Roberts, held that the issuance of the Proclamation violated
neither statutory law nor the Establishment Clause. Justices Kennedy and
Thomas concurred, though Justice Kennedy raised doubts about the
Proclamation's constitutionality apart from the President's ability to
issue it. Justices Breyer and Sotomayor both filed dissents. Justice
Breyer did not directly address the Proclamation's constitutionality,
but merely called for the injunction to remain in place. Justice
Sotomayor, on the other hand, explicitly felt the Proclamation did in
fact violate the Establishment Clause.

International reactions
=======================

Original order
==============

-   *Somalia's President Mohamed Abdullahi "Farmaajo" Mohamed criticized
    the travel ban after it was signed by Trump.*

-   *On March 6, 2017, Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesman Bahram Qasemi
    stated that the government would wait and see the details of the new
    executive order and "would react in proportion."*

-   *After the United States Supreme Court allowed partial
    implementation of Trump's travel ban, Iran stated on June 28, 2017,
    that it would take "reciprocal" action in response.*

On March 6, 2017, Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesman Bahram Qasemi stated
that the government would wait and see the details of the new executive
order and "would react in proportion." Deputy Foreign Minister for
European and American Affairs Majid Takht-Ravanchi stated that Iran will
counter the ban, stating that their earlier countermeasures against the
ban were still in place and added that there was no need for a new
decision. After the United States Supreme Court allowed partial
implementation of Trump's travel ban, Iran stated on June 28, 2017, that
it would take "reciprocal" action in response. Its Foreign Minister
Mohammad Javad Zarif later called the ban "shameful" stating it targeted
"Iranian grandmothers".

Somalia's President Mohamed Abdullahi "Farmaajo" Mohamed criticized the
travel ban after it was signed by Trump. Farmaajo, himself a dual
U.S.-Somali citizen, told the Associated Press that the Somali American
community "contributed to the US economy and the US society in different
ways, and we have to talk about what the Somali people have contributed
rather than a few people who may cause a problem."

The self-proclaimed Republic of Somaliland's Foreign Minister Saad Ali
Shire emphasised Somalia and Somaliland as two different nations,
stating that his nation should not be mixed with Somalia. He claimed,
"We don't have the troubles and problems with terrorism and extremism
that they have in Somalia." Sudan's Foreign Ministry stated it was
disappointed by the travel ban on citizens from the six Muslim-majority
nations including Sudan.

The United Nations stated that the ban will adversely affect the world's
refugees. UN High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo Grandi, stated that
refugees were not criminals but “ordinary people forced to flee war,
violence and persecution in their home countries”.

Iraqi Foreign Ministry expressed "deep relief" over exclusion of the
country from the travel ban, in a statement issued on March 6. It
stated, "The decision is an important step in the right direction, it
consolidates the strategic alliance between Baghdad and Washington in
many fields, and at their forefront war on terrorism."

Modified order
==============

-   *The Tobruk-based House of Representatives government in east Libya
    issued a travel ban on all United States citizens on September 27,
    2017, in retaliation to the travel ban on Libyans by United States.*

-   *Iran's foreign minister Mohammed Javad Zarif criticized the travel
    ban, stating on Twitter, "Trump’s fake empathy for Iranians rings
    ever more hollow, with his new and even more offensive travel ban
    against such outstanding citizens."*

-   *It called the travel ban by U.S. as a "dangerous escalation".*

The Tobruk-based House of Representatives government in east Libya
issued a travel ban on all United States citizens on September 27, 2017,
in retaliation to the travel ban on Libyans by United States. It called
the travel ban by U.S. as a "dangerous escalation". The announcement
stated it affected all Libyans unfairly as it "places every citizen in
the same basket as the terrorists".

Chad's government issued a statement in September 2017 asking the United
States to reconsider the travel ban on the country, stating the decision
"seriously undermines the image of Chad and the good relations between
the two countries." It also stated, "The Chadian Government expresses
its incomprehension in the face of the official reasons behind this
decision."

Venezuelan Foreign Minister Jorge Arreaza Montserrat on September 25
termed the travel ban as a "new aggression" and added it intended to
play to public opinion in the United States against the Maduro
government. Iran's foreign minister Mohammed Javad Zarif criticized the
travel ban, stating on Twitter, "Trump’s fake empathy for Iranians rings
ever more hollow, with his new and even more offensive travel ban
against such outstanding citizens."

Sudan's Foreign Ministry stated on September 25 that the Sudanese
government welcomed the removal of Sudan from the list of countries on
the travel ban, regarding it as "positive and important". It suggested
development of Sudan–United States relations, stating the decision was a
result of prolonged and frank dialogue as well as joint efforts by both
nations. It also reiterated its determination to remove obstacles in
normalization of relations.

The Somali government hired a US lobbying firm, the Sonoran Policy Group
(SPG) on August 21, 2018 that will help the lobbyists de-list Somalia
from the Presidential Proclamation 9645 and to improve military and
diplomatic relations with the United States.

See also
========

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Questions and Answers about the Executive Order from the United
    States Department of Homeland Security*

-   *Announcements about the Executive Order from the United States
    Department of State*

-   *Litigation Documents & Resources Related to Trump Executive Order
    on Immigration compiled by Lawfare Blog*

-   *Fact Sheet by the United States Department of Homeland Security*

Fact Sheet by the United States Department of Homeland Security

Questions and Answers about the Executive Order from the United States
Department of Homeland Security

Announcements about the Executive Order from the United States
Department of State

Litigation Documents & Resources Related to Trump Executive Order on
Immigration compiled by Lawfare Blog

Index and Concordance to the Text of the E.O. No. 13780 compiled by
WhoSaidSo.org

Trump v. Hawaii case page on first review at SCOTUSblog

Trump v. Hawaii case page on second review at SCOTUSblog

Trump v. International Refugee Assistance Project case page on first
review at SCOTUSblog

Trump v. International Refugee Assistance Project case page on second
review on SCOTUSblog

Hawaii v. Trump case page from the Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse
at the University of Michigan Law School

International Refugee Assistance Project v. Trump case page from the
Civil Rights Litigation Clearinghouse at the University of Michigan Law
School

Challenger cases page from the American Civil Liberties Union
