**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GALEX\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

GALEX
=====

-   *The Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) is an orbiting ultraviolet
    space telescope launched on April 28, 2003, and operated until
    early 2012.*

The Galaxy Evolution Explorer (GALEX) is an orbiting ultraviolet space
telescope launched on April 28, 2003, and operated until early 2012.

History
=======

-   *NASA cut off financial support for operations of GALEX in early
    February 2011 as it was ranked lower than other projects which were
    seeking a limited supply of funding.*

-   *The mission's life-cycle cost to NASA was \$150.6 million.*

-   *On June 28, 2013 NASA decommissioned GALEX.*

-   *In May 2012, GALEX operations were transferred to Caltech.*

An airlaunched Pegasus rocket placed the craft into a nearly circular
orbit at an altitude of 697 kilometres (433 mi) and an inclination to
the Earth's equator of 29 degrees.

The first observation was dedicated to the crew of the Space Shuttle
Columbia, being images in the constellation Hercules taken on May 21,
2003. This region was selected because it had been directly overhead the
shuttle at the time of its last contact with the NASA Mission Control
Center.

After its primary mission of 29 months, observation operations were
extended to almost 9 years with NASA placing it into standby mode on 7
Feb 2012.

NASA cut off financial support for operations of GALEX in early February
2011 as it was ranked lower than other projects which were seeking a
limited supply of funding. The mission's life-cycle cost to NASA was
\$150.6 million. The California Institute of Technology negotiated to
transfer control of GALEX and its associated ground control equipment to
the California Institute of Technology in keeping with the
Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act. Under this Act, excess
research equipment owned by the US government can be transferred to
educational institutions and non-profit organizations. In May 2012,
GALEX operations were transferred to Caltech.

On June 28, 2013 NASA decommissioned GALEX. It is expected that the
spacecraft will remain in orbit for at least 65 years before it will
re-enter the atmosphere.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.125in"}\
*GALEX field of view compared to a full Moon*

Science mission
===============

-   *Since scientists believe the Universe to be about 13.8 billion
    years old, the mission will study galaxies and stars across about 10
    billion years of cosmic history.*

-   *The spacecraft's mission is to observe hundreds of thousands of
    galaxies, with the goal of determining the distance of each galaxy
    from Earth and the rate of star formation in each galaxy.*

During its initial 29-month mission, which was extended, it made
observations in ultraviolet wavelengths to measure the history of star
formation in the universe 80 percent of the way back to the Big Bang.
Since scientists believe the Universe to be about 13.8 billion years
old, the mission will study galaxies and stars across about 10 billion
years of cosmic history.

The spacecraft's mission is to observe hundreds of thousands of
galaxies, with the goal of determining the distance of each galaxy from
Earth and the rate of star formation in each galaxy. Near- and far-UV
emissions as measured by GALEX can indicate the presence of young stars,
but may also originate from old stellar populations (e.g. sdB stars).

Partnering with the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) on the mission
are the California Institute of Technology, Orbital Sciences
Corporation, University of California, Berkeley, Yonsei University,
Johns Hopkins University, Columbia University, and Laboratoire
d'Astrophysique de Marseille, France.

The observatory participated in GOALS with Spitzer, Chandra, and Hubble.
GOALS stands for Great Observatories All-sky LIRG Survey, and Luminous
Infrared Galaxies were studied at the multiple wavelengths allowed by
the telescopes.

Specifications
==============

-   *The telescope has a 50 cm diameter aperture primary, in a
    Richey-Chretien f/6 configuration.*

The telescope has a 50 cm diameter aperture primary, in a
Richey-Chretien f/6 configuration. It can see light wavelengths from 135
nanometers to 280 nm, with a field of view of 1.2 degrees wide (larger
than a full moon). It has gallium-arsenide solar cells which supply
nearly 300 watts to the spacecraft.

Pre-launch images
=================

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.5in" height="1.375in"}\
*Mira's bow shock and hydrogen gas tail in ultraviolet.*

![](media/image3.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.774305555555555in"}\
*Ultraviolet view of Cygnus loop*

Examples of results
===================

See also
========

-   *GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey*

GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey

Arecibo Observatory

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *GALEX data archive by the STScI / MAST*

-   *GALEX website by the California Institute of Technology*

-   *GALEX Ultraviolet Sky Survey at Wikisky.org*

-   *GALEX website by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory*

GALEX website by the California Institute of Technology

GALEX website by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory

GALEX data archive by the STScI / MAST

GALEXView Search Tool by the STScI / MAST

GALEX Ultraviolet Sky Survey at Wikisky.org
