**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/General\_English\_Proficiency\_Test\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

General English Proficiency Test
================================

-   *The GEPT was developed by the Language Training and Testing Center
    in Taipei, Taiwan and was first administered in 2002.*

-   *The General English Proficiency Test ('GEPT; Chinese:
    全民英語能力分級檢定測驗; pinyin: Quánmín Yīngyǔ Nénglì Fēnjí
    Jiǎndìng Cèyàn, or 全民英檢/全民英验 Quánmín Yīngjiǎn for short) is
    a test of English language proficiency that was commissioned by
    Taiwan's Ministry of Education in 1999.*

The General English Proficiency Test ('GEPT; Chinese:
全民英語能力分級檢定測驗; pinyin: Quánmín Yīngyǔ Nénglì Fēnjí Jiǎndìng
Cèyàn, or 全民英檢/全民英验 Quánmín Yīngjiǎn for short) is a test of
English language proficiency that was commissioned by Taiwan's Ministry
of Education in 1999. The GEPT was developed by the Language Training
and Testing Center in Taipei, Taiwan and was first administered in 2002.

Overview
========

-   *Those examinees who pass this first stage are allowed to register
    for the second stage, the speaking and writing portions of the
    test.*

-   *Reportedly, comparability studies that will relate the GEPT to the
    Common European Framework standards of language proficiency are
    underway.*

-   *First, all examinees at each level take a listening and reading
    comprehension test.*

There are four levels of the test currently being administered:
elementary, intermediate, high-intermediate, and advanced. A fifth
level, the superior level, was administered only once and then
suspended, pending further need. With the exception of the advanced
level of the test, which is only conducted in Taipei at the LTTC
headquarters, the GEPT is administered at sites located around the
island of Taiwan as well as on offshore islands including Penghu and
Kinmen.

The GEPT Elementary level is presumed to be appropriate for students who
have studied English through junior high school. The GEPT Intermediate
level is seen as suitable for high school graduates or university
freshmen. The GEPT High-intermediate level is thought to be suitable for
university graduates majoring in English. The GEPT Advanced level test
is considered adequately difficult that only someone with a graduate
degree from a university in an English-speaking country would be able to
pass it.

Reportedly, comparability studies that will relate the GEPT to the
Common European Framework standards of language proficiency are
underway.

Each level is administered in a two-stage process. First, all examinees
at each level take a listening and reading comprehension test. Those
examinees who pass this first stage are allowed to register for the
second stage, the speaking and writing portions of the test.

Total number of examinees and passing rates
===========================================

-   *The elementary level test was first administered in 2002 and has
    been held twice each year since then.*

-   *The passing rate for the first stage of the test is currently
    approximately 40%.*

-   *The number of examinees taking stage one of the test totals over
    300,000, with a passing rate of approximately 34% for the first
    stage and 33% for the second stage.*

The elementary level test was first administered in 2002 and has been
held twice each year since then. The total number of examinees to take
the first stage of the elementary test through early 2005 was over
500,000. The passing rate for the first stage of the test is currently
approximately 40%. The passing rate for examinees taking the second
stage is approximately 77%.

The intermediate level of the test has also been held twice yearly since
2002. The number of examinees taking stage one of the test totals over
300,000, with a passing rate of approximately 34% for the first stage
and 33% for the second stage.

The high-intermediate level of the test, also held twice yearly, has had
a total of approximately 60,000 through 2004, and passing rates of 32%
and 30% respectively for stages one and two.

The advanced level of the test is held once yearly, and the total number
of examinees who have taken it since 2002 is approximately 3,000. The
passing rate for stage one is approximately 21% and 16% for stage two.

See also
========

-   *Public English Test System - English test in Mainland China*

Public English Test System - English test in Mainland China

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *"Comparing PETS and GEPT in China and Taiwan" (Archive).*

-   *English Language Teaching (ISSN 1916-4742 (Print); ISSN 1916-4750
    (Online)).*

Wu, Mei (吴 梅; Leshan Normal University). "Comparing PETS and GEPT in
China and Taiwan" (Archive). English Language Teaching (ISSN 1916-4742
(Print); ISSN 1916-4750 (Online)). Canadian Center of Science and
Education, Vol. 5, No. 6; June 2012. Received 24 February 2012.
Published 1 June 2012. DOI: 10.5539/elt.v5n6p48 - See profile page

External links
==============

-   *LTTC's GEPT website*

LTTC's GEPT website
