**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Godesberg%20Program\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Godesberg Program
=================

-   *The Godesberg Program (German: Godesberger Programm) was the party
    program outline of the political course of the Social Democratic
    Party of Germany (SPD).*

-   *The Godesberg program represented a fundamental change in the
    orientation and goals of the SPD.*

-   *The Godesberg Program was superseded in 1989 by the Berlin Program,
    resolved on the 20th of December 1989 at a party congress in
    Berlin.*

The Godesberg Program (German: Godesberger Programm) was the party
program outline of the political course of the Social Democratic Party
of Germany (SPD). It was ratified on 15 November 1959, at an SPD party
convention in the town of Bad Godesberg, which is today part of Bonn.

The Godesberg program represented a fundamental change in the
orientation and goals of the SPD. It rejected the goal of replacing
capitalism, adopting a commitment to reform capitalism, and adopted a
"people's" party orientation that appealed to ethical considerations and
ejected its class-based orientation. Godesberg rejected nationalization
as a major principle of socialism.

The Godesberg program was also notable because the party abandoned and
rejected Marxist theories of materialism and class struggle. In adopting
the Godesberg Program, the SPD dropped its hostility to capitalism,
which had long been the core of party ideology, and sought to move
beyond its old working class base to embrace the full spectrum of
potential voters, adopting a political ideology grounded in ethical
appeals.

Labor unions had abandoned the old demands for nationalization and
instead cooperated increasingly with industry, achieving labor
representation on corporate boards and increases in wages and benefits.
The SPD, after losing national elections in 1953 and 1957, thus moved
toward an American-style image-driven electoral strategy that stressed
personalities, specifically Berlin mayor Willy Brandt.\[citation
needed\] As it prepared for elections in 1961, it proved necessary as
well in 1960 to drop opposition to rearmament and to accept NATO.

The Godesberg Program was superseded in 1989 by the Berlin Program,
resolved on the 20th of December 1989 at a party congress in Berlin.

See also
========

-   *Ethical socialism*

-   *Social democracy*

Willi Eichler

Ethical socialism

Social democracy

Reformism

Notes
=====

External links
==============

-   *Godesberg Program in English (PDF) German History Documents.*

-   *Godesberg Program Retrieved July 6, 2010 ‹See Tfd›(in German)*

Godesberg Program in English (PDF) German History Documents. Retrieved
July 6, 2010

Godesberg Program Retrieved July 6, 2010 ‹See Tfd›(in German)
