**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grand%20Central%20Terminal\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Grand Central Terminal
======================

-   *Grand Central Terminal (GCT; also referred to as Grand Central
    Station or simply as Grand Central) is a commuter rail terminal
    located at 42nd Street and Park Avenue in Midtown Manhattan, New
    York City.*

-   *Grand Central Terminal was built by and named for the New York
    Central Railroad; it also served the New York, New Haven and
    Hartford Railroad and, later, successors to the New York Central.*

Grand Central Terminal (GCT; also referred to as Grand Central Station
or simply as Grand Central) is a commuter rail terminal located at 42nd
Street and Park Avenue in Midtown Manhattan, New York City. Grand
Central is the southern terminus of the Metro-North Railroad's Harlem,
Hudson and New Haven Lines, serving the northern parts of the New York
metropolitan area. It also contains a connection to the New York City
Subway at Grand Central–42nd Street. The terminal is the third-busiest
train station in North America, after New York Penn Station and Toronto
Union Station.

The distinctive architecture and interior design of Grand Central
Terminal's station house have earned it several landmark designations,
including as a National Historic Landmark. Its Beaux-Arts design
incorporates numerous works of art. Grand Central Terminal is one of the
world's ten most visited tourist attractions, with 21.9 million visitors
in 2013, excluding train and subway passengers. The terminal's main
concourse is often used as a meeting place, and is especially featured
in films and television. Grand Central Terminal contains a variety of
stores and food vendors, including a food court on its lower-level
concourse.

Grand Central Terminal was built by and named for the New York Central
Railroad; it also served the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad
and, later, successors to the New York Central. Opened in 1913, the
terminal was built on the site of two similarly named predecessor
stations, the first of which dates to 1871. Grand Central Terminal
served intercity trains until 1991, when Amtrak began routing its trains
through nearby Penn Station. The East Side Access project, which will
bring Long Island Rail Road service to a new station beneath the
terminal, is expected to be completed in late 2022.

Grand Central covers 48 acres (19 ha) and has 44 platforms, more than
any other railroad station in the world. Its platforms, all below
ground, serve 30 tracks on the upper level and 26 on the lower.
Currently, 43 tracks are in use for passenger service; two dozen more
serve as a rail yard and sidings. Another eight tracks and four
platforms are being built on two new levels deep underneath the existing
station as part of East Side Access.

Name
====

-   *Grand Central Terminal was named by and for the New York Central
    Railroad, which built the station and its two precursors on the
    site.*

-   *It has "always been more colloquially and affectionately known as
    Grand Central Station", the name of its immediate precursor that
    operated from 1900 until 1910 and which also shares its name with
    the nearby U.S. Post Office station at 450 Lexington Avenue and,
    colloquially, with the Grand Central–42nd Street subway station next
    to the terminal.*

Grand Central Terminal was named by and for the New York Central
Railroad, which built the station and its two precursors on the site. It
has "always been more colloquially and affectionately known as Grand
Central Station", the name of its immediate precursor that operated from
1900 until 1910 and which also shares its name with the nearby U.S. Post
Office station at 450 Lexington Avenue and, colloquially, with the Grand
Central–42nd Street subway station next to the terminal.

Services
========

Commuter rail
=============

-   *Grand Central Terminal serves some 67 million passengers a year,
    more than any other Metro-North station.*

-   *Through these lines, the terminal serves Metro-North commuters
    traveling to and from the Bronx in New York City; Westchester,
    Putnam, and Dutchess counties in New York; and Fairfield and New
    Haven counties in Connecticut.*

Grand Central Terminal serves some 67 million passengers a year, more
than any other Metro-North station. At morning rush hour, a train
arrives at the terminal every 58 seconds.

Three of Metro-North's five main lines terminate at Grand Central:

Harlem Line to Wassaic, New York

Hudson Line to Poughkeepsie, New York (Amtrak connection to Albany)

New Haven Line to New Haven, Connecticut (Amtrak connection to Hartford,
Springfield, Boston; Shore Line East to New London)\
New Canaan Branch to New Canaan, Connecticut\
Danbury Branch to Danbury, Connecticut\
Waterbury Branch to Waterbury, Connecticut

Through these lines, the terminal serves Metro-North commuters traveling
to and from the Bronx in New York City; Westchester, Putnam, and
Dutchess counties in New York; and Fairfield and New Haven counties in
Connecticut.

Connecting services
===================

-   *4, ​5, ​6, and &lt;6&gt; trains (IRT Lexington Avenue Line),
    situated diagonally under the Pershing Square Building, 42nd Street,
    and Grand Hyatt New York*

-   *The New York City Subway's adjacent Grand Central–42nd Street
    station serves these routes:*

-   *These MTA Regional Bus Operations buses stop near Grand Central:*

The New York City Subway's adjacent Grand Central–42nd Street station
serves these routes:

4, ​5, ​6, and &lt;6&gt; trains (IRT Lexington Avenue Line), situated
diagonally under the Pershing Square Building, 42nd Street, and Grand
Hyatt New York

7 and &lt;7&gt;​ trains (IRT Flushing Line), under 42nd Street between
Park Avenue and west of Third Avenue

S train (42nd Street Shuttle), under 42nd Street between Madison Avenue
and Vanderbilt Avenue

These MTA Regional Bus Operations buses stop near Grand Central:

NYCT Bus:\
M1, M2, M3, M4 and Q32 local buses at Madison Avenue (northbound) and
Fifth Avenue (southbound)\
X27, X28, X37, X38, SIM4C, SIM6, SIM8, SIM8X, SIM11, SIM22, SIM25,
SIM26, SIM30, SIM31 and SIM33C express buses at Madison Avenue
(northbound)\
X27, X28, X37, X38, SIM4C, SIM8, SIM8X, SIM25, SIM31 and SIM33C express
buses at Fifth Avenue (southbound)\
M42 local bus at 42nd Street\
M101, M102 and M103 local buses at Third Avenue (northbound) and
Lexington Avenue (southbound)\
X27, X28, X63, X64 and X68 express buses at Third Avenue (northbound)\
SIM6, SIM11, SIM22 and SIM26 express buses at Lexington Avenue
(southbound)

MTA Bus:\
BxM3, BxM4, BxM6, BxM7, BxM8, BxM9, BxM10, BxM18, BM1, BM2, BM3, BM4 and
BM5 express buses at Madison Avenue (northbound) and Fifth Avenue
(southbound)\
BxM1 express bus at Lexington Avenue (southbound)\
BxM1, QM21, QM31, QM32, QM34, QM35, QM36, QM40, QM42 and QM44 express
buses at Third Avenue (northbound)

Academy Bus:\
SIM23 and SIM24 express buses at Madison Avenue (northbound) and Fifth
Avenue (southbound)

Former services
===============

-   *Another notable former train was New York Central's 20th Century
    Limited, a luxury service that operated to Chicago's LaSalle Street
    Station between 1902 and 1967 and was among the most famous trains
    of its time.*

-   *From 1971 to 1991, all Amtrak trains using the Empire Corridor
    terminated at Grand Central; Northeast Corridor trains used Penn
    Station.*

The terminal and its predecessors were designed for intercity service,
which operated from the first station building's completion in 1871
until Amtrak ceased operations in the terminal in 1991. Through
transfers, passengers could connect to all major lines in the United
States, including the Canadian, the Empire Builder, the San Francisco
Zephyr, the Southwest Limited, the Crescent, and the Sunset Limited
under Amtrak. Destinations included San Francisco, Los Angeles,
Vancouver, New Orleans, Chicago, and Montreal. Another notable former
train was New York Central's 20th Century Limited, a luxury service that
operated to Chicago's LaSalle Street Station between 1902 and 1967 and
was among the most famous trains of its time.

From 1971 to 1991, all Amtrak trains using the Empire Corridor
terminated at Grand Central; Northeast Corridor trains used Penn
Station. Notable Amtrak services at Grand Central included the Lake
Shore, Empire Service, Ethan Allen Express, Adirondack, Niagara Rainbow,
Maple Leaf, and Empire State Express.

Planned services
================

-   *The Metropolitan Transportation Authority plans to bring Long
    Island Rail Road commuter trains to a new station beneath Grand
    Central as part of its East Side Access project.*

The Metropolitan Transportation Authority plans to bring Long Island
Rail Road commuter trains to a new station beneath Grand Central as part
of its East Side Access project. The project will connect the terminal
to the railroad's Main Line, which connects to all of the LIRR's
branches and almost all of its stations. As of 2018\[update\], service
is expected to begin in late 2022.

Interior
========

-   *Grand Central Terminal was designed and built with two main levels
    for passengers: an upper for intercity trains and a lower for
    commuter trains.*

-   *Grand Central Terminal's 48-acre (19 ha) basements are among the
    largest in the city.*

-   *This scheme, devised by New York Central vice president William J.
    Wilgus, separated intercity and commuter-rail passengers, smoothing
    the flow of people in and through the station.*

Grand Central Terminal was designed and built with two main levels for
passengers: an upper for intercity trains and a lower for commuter
trains. This scheme, devised by New York Central vice president William
J. Wilgus, separated intercity and commuter-rail passengers, smoothing
the flow of people in and through the station. After intercity service
ended in 1991, the upper level was renamed the Main Concourse and the
lower the Dining Concourse.

The original plan for Grand Central's interior was designed by Reed and
Stem, with some work by Whitney Warren of Warren and Wetmore.

Grand Central Terminal's 48-acre (19 ha) basements are among the largest
in the city.

Main Concourse
==============

-   *The Main Concourse, originally known as the Express Concourse, is
    located on the upper platform level of Grand Central, in the
    geographical center of the station building.*

-   *Underneath the east and west balconies are entrances to Grand
    Central's passageways, with shops and ticket machines along the
    walls.*

-   *:74 Its vastness was meant to evoke the terminal's "grand" status.*

The Main Concourse, originally known as the Express Concourse, is
located on the upper platform level of Grand Central, in the
geographical center of the station building. Usually filled with
bustling crowds and often used as a meeting place, the cavernous
concourse measures 275 ft (84 m) long by 120 ft (37 m) wide (about
35,000 square feet total) by 125 ft (38 m) high.:74 Its vastness was
meant to evoke the terminal's "grand" status.

The Main Concourse contains an elliptical barrel-vaulted ceiling.
Original plans called for the ceiling to contain a skylight, but this
was not practical. Instead, the ceiling contains an elaborately
decorated mural of constellations. The celestial mural was conceived in
1912 by architect Warren and painter Paul César Helleu, and executed by
Brooklyn's Hewlett-Basing Studio. The ceiling contains several
astronomical inaccuracies: the stars within some constellations appear
correctly as they would from earth, other constellations are reversed
left-to-right, as is the overall arrangement of the constellations on
the ceiling. Though the astronomical inconsistencies were noticed
promptly by a commuter in 1913, they have not been corrected in any of
the subsequent renovations of the ceiling. Suspended from other portions
of the ceiling are ten globe-shaped chandeliers in the Beaux-Arts style,
each of which weighs 800 pounds (360 kg) and contains 110 bulbs.

The concourse is lit by these chandeliers and by large windows in its
east and west walls. Each wall has three round-arched windows, about 60
feet (18 m) high, identical in size and shape to the three on the
terminal's south facade. Catwalks, used mostly for maintenance, run
across the east and west windows. Their floors are made of
semi-transparent rock crystal, cut two inches thick.

The ticket booths are located in the Main Concourse, although many have
been closed or repurposed since the introduction of ticket vending
machines. The concourse's large American flag was installed there a few
days after the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center.

The upper-level tracks are reached from the Main Concourse or from
various hallways and passages branching off from it.

The Main Concourse is surrounded on most of its sides by balconies. The
east side is occupied by an Apple Store, while the west side is occupied
by the Italian restaurant Cipriani Dolci (part of Cipriani S.A.), the
Campbell Palm Court, and the Campbell Bar, a former financier's
office-turned-bar. The balconies may be reached by the concourse's West
Stairs, original to the station, or the matching East Stairs, added
during a 1990s renovation. Underneath the east and west balconies are
entrances to Grand Central's passageways, with shops and ticket machines
along the walls. This area also features two intricately carved marble
water fountains. The fountains, original to the terminal, still operate
and are cleaned daily, though they are rarely used.

Information booth and clock
===========================

-   *The booth is topped by a four-faced brass clock that may be Grand
    Central's most recognizable icon.*

-   *Along with the rest of the New York Central Railroad system's
    clocks, it was formerly set to a clock in the train dispatcher's
    office at Grand Central.*

-   *Through the 1980s, they were set to a master clock at a workshop in
    Grand Central.*

The 18-sided main information booth — originally the "information
bureau" — is in the center of the concourse. Its attendants provide
train schedules and other information to the public; in 2015, they
fielded more than 1,000 questions an hour, according to an MTA
spokesman. A door within the marble and brass pagoda conceals a spiral
staircase down to a similar booth on the station's Dining Concourse.

The booth is topped by a four-faced brass clock that may be Grand
Central's most recognizable icon. The clock was designed by Henry Edward
Bedford, cast in Waterbury, Connecticut, and designed by the Self
Winding Clock Company and built by the Seth Thomas Clock Company, along
with several other clocks in the terminal. Each 24-inch (61 cm) face is
made from opalescent glass, now often called opal glass or milk glass.
(Urban legend says the faces are actually opal, valued by Sotheby's or
Christie's between \$10 million and \$20 million.) The clock was first
stopped for repairs in 1954, after it was found to be losing a minute or
two per day.

Along with the rest of the New York Central Railroad system's clocks, it
was formerly set to a clock in the train dispatcher's office at Grand
Central. Through the 1980s, they were set to a master clock at a
workshop in Grand Central. Since 2004, they have been set to the United
States Naval Observatory's atomic clock, accurate to a billionth of a
second.

Departure and gate boards
=========================

-   *In 2017, the boards were again scheduled to be replaced, this time
    with fully digital screens, with the first new display installed
    from March to April 2019.*

-   *The new display was dubbed a Solari board after its Italian
    manufacturer Solari di Udine \[it\].*

-   *The new displays, designed by the MTA and New York's State Historic
    Preservation Office, are brighter and easier to read, and are
    necessary because the old equipment's software was no longer
    available.*

The terminal's primary departure board is located on the south side of
the concourse, installed directly atop the two sets of ticket windows.
The board, colloquially known as the "Big Board", shows the track and
status of arriving and departing trains.

There have been five departure boards used over the terminal's history:
the 1913–1967 chalkboard, the 1967–1985 Solari board, the 1985–1996
Omega board, the 1996–present LCD board, and the 2019 fully digital
display. Beginning in 1913, train arrival and departure information was
hand-chalked on a blackboard in the Biltmore Room. In 1967, the
blackboard was supplanted by an electromechanical display in the main
concourse over the ticket windows; the original chalkboard remains as a
relic in the Biltmore Room. The new display was dubbed a Solari board
after its Italian manufacturer Solari di Udine \[it\]. It displayed
train information on rows of flip panels that made a distinctive
flapping sound as they rotated to reflect changes. That sign was
replaced in 1985 with the Omega board, named after its manufacturer,
watchmaker Omega SA (though designed and installed by Advanced Computer
Systems of Dayton, Ohio). In July 1996, during the terminal's
renovation, the board was again removed, to be replaced with a
liquid-crystal display, installed several months later. This board
replicated the analog look of the older boards, and was the first
installed over both the east and the west ticket offices. In 2017, the
boards were again scheduled to be replaced, this time with fully digital
screens, with the first new display installed from March to April 2019.
The project is estimated to be completed in June 2019. The new displays,
designed by the MTA and New York's State Historic Preservation Office,
are brighter and easier to read, and are necessary because the old
equipment's software was no longer available. Commuter complaints about
the fully digital boards have been published in the news, as had
complaints over the three prior board replacements, in 1967, 1985, and
1996.

There are also arrival and departure displays at each of the platform
gates, about 93 in total. Originally these were cloth curtains with
train information stitched onto them, posted at the platform entrances.
The signs were eventually replaced with flip panels, replaced again with
the installation of the Omega Board in 1987, and supplanted again by LCD
panels, which are being replaced between 2017 and 2020.

Uses
====

-   *Several celebrations have also taken place at the terminal, such as
    a celebration for the New York Giants after they won the NFL
    championship in 1933; an event for the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1941; and
    several large parties and New Year's celebrations.*

The size of the Main Concourse has made it an ideal advertising space.
During World War II, a large mural with images of the United States
military hung in the concourse, and from the 1950s to 1989, the Kodak
Colorama exhibit was a prominent fixture. A
thirteen-and-a-half-foot-diameter (4.1 m) illuminated clock hung in the
Main Concourse at the entrance to the main waiting room from the 1960s
to the 1990s. The clock, sometimes referred to as "Big Ben", had chimes,
and after 1986, news and stock information. The clock was sponsored by
at least five companies; its first and most significant was Westclox.
All of these advertisements and fixtures were removed around the time of
the terminal's renovation in the 1990s; today, only four advertisement
screens remain on the concourse, each about 7 x 6 feet.

The Main Concourse has also been used as a gathering venue. In the
1960s, the terminal's tenant CBS installed a CBS News television screen
above the ticket offices to follow the spaceflights of Project Mercury;
thousands would gather in the Main Concourse to watch key events of the
flights. Politicians such as U.S. presidents Calvin Coolidge and Harry
S. Truman; presidential candidates Thomas Dewey and Robert F. Kennedy;
and governor Herbert Lehman have also held events within the concourse.
The Main Concourse has also been used for memorials, including events to
commemorate U.S. ambassador to France Myron T. Herrick and former first
lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis after their deaths; celebrations for
Martin Luther King Jr. Day; and an impromptu memorial created after the
September 11 attacks in 2001. Several celebrations have also taken place
at the terminal, such as a celebration for the New York Giants after
they won the NFL championship in 1933; an event for the Brooklyn Dodgers
in 1941; and several large parties and New Year's celebrations.

Various special exhibits and events have also been held at the Main
Concourse throughout the years.

Passageways
===========

-   *Several passages run north of the terminal, including the
    north-south 45th Street Passage, which leads to 45th Street and
    Madison Avenue, and the network of tunnels in Grand Central North,
    which lead to exits at every street from 45th to 48th Street.*

-   *The middle passageway houses Grand Central Market, a cluster of
    food purveyor shops.*

In their design for the station's interior, Reed & Stem created a
circulation system that allowed passengers alighting from trains to
enter the Main Concourse, then leave through various passages that
branch from it. Among these are the north-south 42nd Street Passage and
Shuttle Passage, which run south to 42nd Street; and three east-west
passageways — the Grand Central Market, the Graybar Passage, and the
Lexington Passage — that run about 240 feet east to Lexington Avenue by
43rd Street. Several passages run north of the terminal, including the
north-south 45th Street Passage, which leads to 45th Street and Madison
Avenue, and the network of tunnels in Grand Central North, which lead to
exits at every street from 45th to 48th Street.

Each of the east-west passageways runs through a different building. The
northernmost is the Graybar Passage, built on the first floor of the
Graybar Building in 1926. Its walls and seven large transverse arches
are of coursed ashlar travertine, and the floor is terrazzo. The ceiling
is composed of seven groin vaults, each of which has an ornamental
bronze chandelier. The first two vaults, as viewed from leaving Grand
Central, are painted with cumulus clouds, while the third contains a
1927 mural by Edward Trumbull depicting American transportation.

The middle passageway houses Grand Central Market, a cluster of food
purveyor shops. The site was originally a segment of 43rd Street which
became the terminal's first service dock in 1913. In the mid-1970s, a
savings bank was built in the space, which was converted into the
marketplace in 1998, and involved installing a new limestone facade on
the building. The building's second story, whose balcony overlooks the
market and 43rd Street, was to house a restaurant; it is currently used
for storage.

The southernmost of the three, the Lexington Passage, was originally
known as the Commodore Passage after the hotel it ran through. When the
hotel was renamed the Grand Hyatt, the passage was likewise renamed. The
passage acquired its current name during the terminal's renovation in
the 1990s.

Grand Central North
===================

-   *Grand Central North is a network of four tunnels that allow people
    to walk between the station building (located between 42nd and 44th
    Street) and exits at every street from 45th to 48th Street.*

-   *Since summer 2006, Grand Central North has been closed on weekends;
    MTA officials cited low usage and the need to save money.*

Grand Central North is a network of four tunnels that allow people to
walk between the station building (located between 42nd and 44th Street)
and exits at every street from 45th to 48th Street. The 1,000-foot
(300 m) Northwest Passage and 1,200-foot (370 m) Northeast Passage run
parallel to the tracks on the upper level, while two shorter
cross-passages run perpendicular to the tracks. The 47th Street
cross-passage runs between the upper and lower tracks, 30 feet (9.1 m)
below street level; it provides access to upper-level tracks. The 45th
Street cross-passage runs under the lower tracks, 50 feet (15 m) below
street level. Converted from a corridor built to transport luggage and
mail, it provides access to lower-level tracks.

The tunnels' street-level entrances, each enclosed by a freestanding
glass structure, sit at the northeast corner of East 47th Street and
Madison Avenue (Northwest Passage), northeast corner of East 48th Street
and Park Avenue (Northeast Passage), on the east and west sides of 230
Park Avenue (Helmsley Building) between 45th and 46th Streets, and
(since 2012) on the south side of 47th Street between Park and Lexington
Avenues. Pedestrians can also take an elevator to the 47th Street
passage from the north side of East 47th Street, between Madison and
Vanderbilt Avenues.

Proposals for these tunnels had been discussed since at least the 1970s.
The MTA approved preliminary plans in 1983, gave final approval in 1991,
and began construction in 1994. Dubbed the North End Access Project, the
work was to be completed in 1997 at a cost of \$64.5 million, but it was
slowed by the incomplete nature of the building's original blueprints
and by previously undiscovered groundwater beneath East 45th Street. The
passageways opened on August 18, 1999, at a final cost of \$75 million.

The passages contain an MTA Arts & Design mosaic installation by Ellen
Driscoll, an artist from Brooklyn.

The entrances to Grand Central North were originally open from 6:30 a.m.
to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. on Saturday
and Sunday. About 6,000 people used the passages on a typical weekend,
and about 30,000 on weekdays. Since summer 2006, Grand Central North has
been closed on weekends; MTA officials cited low usage and the need to
save money.

Other spaces on the main floor
==============================

Vanderbilt Hall
===============

-   *Vanderbilt Hall is an event space on the south side of the
    terminal, between the Park Avenue entrance and the Main Concourse to
    its north.*

-   *It was formerly the main waiting room for the terminal, used
    particularly by intercity travelers.*

-   *When intercity service ceased at Grand Central in 1991, the room
    began to be used by several hundred homeless people.*

Vanderbilt Hall is an event space on the south side of the terminal,
between the Park Avenue entrance and the Main Concourse to its north.
Its west side houses a food hall. The space is lit by Beaux-Arts
chandeliers with 132 bulbs on four tiers.

It was formerly the main waiting room for the terminal, used
particularly by intercity travelers. The space featured double-sided oak
benches and could seat 700 people. When intercity service ceased at
Grand Central in 1991, the room began to be used by several hundred
homeless people. Terminal management responded first by removing the
room's benches, then by closing the space entirely. In 1998, the hall
was renovated and renamed Vanderbilt Hall after the family that built
and owned the station. It is now used for the annual Christmas Market,
as well as for special exhibitions and private events.

Since 1999, Vanderbilt Hall has hosted the annual Tournament of
Champions squash championship. The event involves installation of a 21 x
32-foot free-standing theatre in the round, made of glass, with
spectators sitting on three sides around it.

In 2016, the west half of the hall became the Great Northern Food Hall,
an upscale Nordic-themed food court with five pavilions. The food hall
is the first long-term tenant of the space; the terminal's landmark
status prevents permanent installations.

A men's smoking room and women's waiting room were formerly located on
the west and east sides of Vanderbilt Hall, respectively. In 2016, the
men's room was renovated into Agern, an 85-seat Nordic-themed 85-seat
fine dining and Michelin-starred restaurant operated by Noma co-founder
Claus Meyer, who also runs the food hall.

Biltmore Room
=============

-   *Completed in 1915 directly beneath the New York Biltmore Hotel, it
    originally served as a waiting room for intercity trains known
    formally as the incoming train room and colloquially as the "Kissing
    Room".*

-   *The room's blackboard displayed the arrival and departure times of
    New York Central trains until 1967, when a mechanical board was
    installed in the Main Concourse.*

The Biltmore Room is a 64-by-80-foot (20 by 24 m) marble hall northwest
of the Main Concourse that serves as an entrance to tracks 39 through
42. Completed in 1915 directly beneath the New York Biltmore Hotel, it
originally served as a waiting room for intercity trains known formally
as the incoming train room and colloquially as the "Kissing Room".

As the station's passenger traffic declined in mid-century, the room
fell into neglect. In 1982 and 1983, the room was damaged during the
construction that converted the Biltmore Hotel into the Bank of America
Plaza. In 1985, Giorgio Cavaglieri was hired to restore the room, which
at the time had cracked marble, makeshift lighting, and series of
lockers. Later, the room held a newsstand, flower stand, and shoe shine
booths. In 2015, the MTA awarded a contract to refurbish the Biltmore
Room into an arrival area for Long Island Rail Road passengers as part
of the East Side Access project. As part of the project, the room's
booths and stands are to be replaced by a pair of escalators and an
elevator to the deep-level LIRR concourse.

The room's blackboard displayed the arrival and departure times of New
York Central trains until 1967, when a mechanical board was installed in
the Main Concourse.

Station Master's Office
=======================

-   *The Station Master's Office, located near Track 36, has Grand
    Central's only dedicated waiting room.*

The Station Master's Office, located near Track 36, has Grand Central's
only dedicated waiting room. The space has benches, restrooms, and a
floral mixed-media mural on three of its walls. The room's benches were
previously located in the former waiting room, now known as Vanderbilt
Hall. Since 2008, the area has offered free Wi-Fi.

Former theatre
==============

-   *The New York Times reported a cost of \$125,000 for the theater's
    construction, which was attributed to construction of an elevator
    between the theater and the suburban concourse as well as air
    conditioning and apparatuses for people hard of hearing.*

-   *One of the retail areas of the Graybar Passage, currently occupied
    by alcohol vendor Central Cellars, was the Grand Central Theatre or
    Terminal Newsreel Theatre.*

One of the retail areas of the Graybar Passage, currently occupied by
alcohol vendor Central Cellars, was the Grand Central Theatre or
Terminal Newsreel Theatre. Opened in 1937, the theater showed short
films, cartoons, and newsreels continuously from 9 a.m. to 11 p.m. for
25-cent tickets. Designed by Tony Sarg, it had 242 stadium-style seats
and a standing-room section with armchairs. A small bar sat near the
entrance. The theater's interior had simple pine walls spaced out to
eliminate echos, along with an inglenook, a fireplace, and an
illuminated clock for the convenience of travelers. The walls of the
lobby, dubbed the "appointment lounge", were covered with world maps;
the ceiling had an astronomical mural painted by Sarg. The New York
Times reported a cost of \$125,000 for the theater's construction, which
was attributed to construction of an elevator between the theater and
the suburban concourse as well as air conditioning and apparatuses for
people hard of hearing.

The theater stopped showing newsreels by 1968 but continued operating
until around 1979, when it was gutted for retail space, A renovation in
the early 2000s removed a false ceiling, revealing the theater's
projection window and its astronomical mural, which proved similar in
colors and style to the Main Concourse ceiling.

Dining Concourse
================

-   *Today, it has central seating and lounge areas, surrounded by
    restaurants and food vendors.*

-   *As part of the terminal's late-1990s renovation, stands and
    restaurants were installed in the concourse, and escalators added to
    link to the main concourse level.*

-   *Since 2015, part of the Dining Concourse has been closed for the
    construction of structural framework to support stairways and
    escalators to the new LIRR terminal being built as part of East Side
    Access.*

Access to the lower-level tracks is provided by the Dining Concourse,
below the Main Concourse and connected to it by numerous stairs, ramps,
and escalators. For decades, it was called the Suburban Concourse
because it handled commuter rail trains. Today, it has central seating
and lounge areas, surrounded by restaurants and food vendors.

The concourses are connected by two ramps, which comprise a 302-foot
(92 m) west-east axis under an 84-foot (26 m) ceiling. They intersect a
slight slope from the Dining Concourse just outside the Oyster Bar,
under an archway covered with Guastavino tiling. The arch creates a
whispering gallery: someone standing in one corner can hear someone
speaking softly in the opposite corner. An overpass between the main
concourse and the Vanderbilt Hall passes over the archway; from 1927
until 1998, the sides of the bridge were enclosed by walls about 8 feet
(2.4 m) high.

As part of the terminal's late-1990s renovation, stands and restaurants
were installed in the concourse, and escalators added to link to the
main concourse level. Additionally, the MTA spent \$2.2 million to
construct two 45-foot-wide circular designs in the concourse's floor.
The designs were by David Rockwell and Beyer Blinder Belle, made of
terrazzo, and installed over the concourse's original terrazzo floor.
Since 2015, part of the Dining Concourse has been closed for the
construction of structural framework to support stairways and escalators
to the new LIRR terminal being built as part of East Side Access.

A small square-framed clock is installed in the ceiling near Tracks 108
and 109. It was manufactured at an unknown time by the Self Winding
Clock Company, which made several others in the terminal. The clock hung
inside the gate at Track 19 until 2011, when it was moved so it would
not be blocked by lights added during upper-level platform improvements.

Lost-and-found bureau
=====================

-   *Metro-North's lost-and-found bureau sits near Track 100 at the far
    east end of the Dining Concourse.*

-   *In 2013, the bureau reported an 80% return rate, among the highest
    in the world for a transit agency.*

Metro-North's lost-and-found bureau sits near Track 100 at the far east
end of the Dining Concourse. Incoming items are sorted according to
function and date: for instance, there are separate bins for hats,
gloves, belts, and ties. The sorting system was computerized in the
1990s. Lost items are kept for up to 90 days before being donated or
auctioned off.

As early as 1920, the bureau received between 15,000 and 18,000 items a
year. By 2002, the bureau was collecting "3,000 coats and jackets; 2,500
cellphones; 2,000 sets of keys; 1,500 wallets, purses and ID's \[sic\];
and 1,100 umbrellas" a year. By 2007, it was collecting 20,000 items a
year, 60% of which were eventually claimed. In 2013, the bureau reported
an 80% return rate, among the highest in the world for a transit agency.

Some of the more unusual items collected by the bureau include fake
teeth, prosthetic body parts, legal documents, diamond pouches, live
animals, and a \$100,000 violin. One story has it that a woman purposely
left her unfaithful husband's ashes on a Metro-North train before
collecting it three weeks later. In 1996, some of the lost-and-found
items were displayed at an art exhibition.

Other food service and retail spaces
====================================

-   *Grand Central Terminal contains restaurants such as the Grand
    Central Oyster Bar & Restaurant and various fast food outlets
    surrounding the Dining Concourse.*

-   *There are also delis, bakeries, a gourmet and fresh food market,
    and an annex of the New York Transit Museum.*

Grand Central Terminal contains restaurants such as the Grand Central
Oyster Bar & Restaurant and various fast food outlets surrounding the
Dining Concourse. There are also delis, bakeries, a gourmet and fresh
food market, and an annex of the New York Transit Museum. The 40-plus
retail stores include newsstands and chain stores, including a Starbucks
coffee shop, a Rite Aid pharmacy, and an Apple Store.

The Oyster Bar, the oldest business in the terminal, sits next to the
Dining Concourse and below Vanderbilt Hall.

An elegantly restored cocktail lounge, the Campbell, sits just south of
the 43rd Street/Vanderbilt Avenue entrance. A mix of commuters and
tourists access it from the street or the balcony level. The space was
once the office of 1920s tycoon John W. Campbell, who decorated it to
resemble the galleried hall of a 13th-century Florentine palace. In
1999, it opened as a bar, the Campbell Apartment; a new owner renovated
and renamed it the Campbell in 2017.

Vanderbilt Tennis Club and former studios
=========================================

-   *Douglas Edwards with the News broadcast from Grand Central for
    several years, covering John Glenn's 1962 Mercury-Atlas 6 space
    flight and other events.*

-   *was first broadcast from Grand Central, as were "The Goldbergs" and
    Mama.*

-   *In 1958, CBS opened the world's first major videotape operations
    facility in Grand Central.*

From 1939 to 1964, CBS Television occupied a large portion of the
terminal building, particularly above Vanderbilt Hall. The space
contained two "program control" facilities (43 and 44); network master
control; facilities for local station WCBS-TV; and, after World War II,
two 700,000-square-foot (65,000 m2) production studios (41 and 42).
Broadcasts were transmitted from an antenna atop the nearby Chrysler
Building installed by order of CBS chief executive William S. Paley, and
were also shown on a large screen in the Main Concourse. In 1958, CBS
opened the world's first major videotape operations facility in Grand
Central. Located in a former rehearsal room on the seventh floor, the
facility used 14 Ampex VR-1000 videotape recorders.

Douglas Edwards with the News broadcast from Grand Central for several
years, covering John Glenn's 1962 Mercury-Atlas 6 space flight and other
events. Edward R. Murrow's See It Now originated there, including his
famous broadcasts on Senator Joseph McCarthy, which were recreated in
George Clooney's movie Good Night, and Good Luck, although the film
incorrectly implies that CBS News and corporate offices were in the same
building. The long-running panel show "What's My Line?" was first
broadcast from Grand Central, as were "The Goldbergs" and Mama. CBS
eventually moved its operations to the CBS Broadcast Center.

In 1966, the vacated studio space was converted to Vanderbilt Tennis
Club, a sports club named for the hall just below. Founded by Geza A.
Gazdag, an athlete and Olympic coach who fled Hungary amid its 1956
revolution, its two tennis courts were once deemed the most expensive
place to play the game — \$58 an hour — until financial recessions
forced the club to lower the hourly fee to \$40. In 1984, the club was
purchased by real estate magnate Donald Trump, who discovered it while
renovating the terminal's exterior and operated it until 2009.

The space is currently occupied by a conductor lounge and a smaller
sports facility with a single tennis court.

Basement spaces
===============

Power and heating plant
=======================

-   *The second was built in 1900 under the west side of Grand Central
    Station near 43rd Street.*

-   *The plant also provided power to the tracks and the station,
    supplementing other New York Central power plants in Yonkers
    (today's Glenwood Power Station) and Port Morris in the Bronx (now
    demolished).*

-   *Grand Central Terminal and its predecessors contained their own
    power plants.*

-   *In addition, the Grand Central power plant provided power to nearby
    buildings.*

Grand Central Terminal and its predecessors contained their own power
plants. The first such plant, built for Grand Central Depot in the
1870s, stood in the surface-level railroad yards at Madison Avenue and
46th Street. The second was built in 1900 under the west side of Grand
Central Station near 43rd Street.

When the terminal was created, a new power and heating plant was built
on the east side of Park Avenue between 49th and 50th Streets. The
two-smokestack structure could supply a daily average of 5,000,000
pounds (2,300,000 kg) of heating steam. The plant also provided power to
the tracks and the station, supplementing other New York Central power
plants in Yonkers (today's Glenwood Power Station) and Port Morris in
the Bronx (now demolished). While the Port Morris and Yonkers plants
provided 11,000-volt alternating current for arriving and departing
locomotives, the Grand Central plant converted the alternating current
to 800 volts of direct current for use by the terminal's own
third-rail-powered locomotives. In addition, the Grand Central power
plant provided power to nearby buildings.

By the late 1920s, most power and heating services were contracted out
to Consolidated Edison, and so the power plant was torn down in 1929.
(Its only remaining vestige is the storage yard under the Waldorf
Astoria New York hotel built in 1931.) A new substation —the world's
largest at the time — was built 100 feet (30 m) under the Graybar
Building at a cost of \$3 million. Occupying a four-story space with a
footprint of 250 by 50 feet (76 by 15 m), it is divided into substation
1T, which provides 16,500 kilowatts (22,100 hp) for third-rail power,
and substation 1L, which provides 8,000 kilowatts (11,000 hp) for other
lighting and power.

A sub-basement, dubbed M42, contains the AC-to-DC converters that supply
DC traction current to the tracks. Though sources vary on its exact
depth, it is thought to be located 105 to 109 feet (32 to 33 m) below
ground, or either 10 or 13 stories deep. The M42 basement was installed
in the former boiler void excavated in the bedrock beneath the
present-day Grand Central Market and the entrance to the Graybar
Building, three levels below the lower Metro-North level. Two of the
original rotary converters remain as a historical record. During World
War II, this facility was closely guarded because its sabotage would
have impaired troop movement on the Eastern Seaboard. It is said that
any unauthorized person entering the facility during the war risked
being shot on sight; the rotary converters could have easily been
crippled by a bucket of sand. The Abwehr, a German espionage service,
sent two spies to sabotage it; they were arrested by the FBI before they
could strike. M42 also included a system to monitor trains in and around
the terminal, which was used from 1913 until 1922, when it was
supplemented by telegraphs.

Carey's Hole
============

-   *Carey would store his merchandise in an unfinished, underground
    area of the terminal, which railroad employees and maintenance staff
    began calling "Carey's Hole".*

-   *In 1913, when the terminal opened, J. P. Carey opened a barbershop
    adjacent to and one level below the terminal's waiting room (now
    Vanderbilt Hall).*

Another part of the basement is known as Carey's Hole. The two-story
section is directly beneath the Shuttle Passage and adjacent spaces. In
1913, when the terminal opened, J. P. Carey opened a barbershop adjacent
to and one level below the terminal's waiting room (now Vanderbilt
Hall). Carey's business expanded to include a laundry service, shoe
store, and haberdashery. In 1921, Carey also ran a limousine service
using Packard cars, and in the 1930s, he added regular car and bus
service to the city's airports as they opened. Carey would store his
merchandise in an unfinished, underground area of the terminal, which
railroad employees and maintenance staff began calling "Carey's Hole".
The name has remained even as the space has been used for different
purposes, including currently as a lounge and dormitory for railroad
employees.

Platforms and tracks
====================

-   *Because of the size of the rail yards, Park Avenue and its side
    streets from 43rd Street to 59th Street are raised on viaducts, and
    the surrounding blocks were covered over by various buildings.*

-   *At its busiest, the terminal is served by an arriving train every
    58 seconds.*

-   *The terminal holds the Guinness World Record for having the most
    platforms of any railroad station: 28, which support 44 platform
    numbers.*

The terminal holds the Guinness World Record for having the most
platforms of any railroad station: 28, which support 44 platform
numbers. All are island platforms except one side platform. Odd-numbered
tracks are usually on the east side of the platform; even-numbered
tracks on the west side. As of 2016\[update\], there are 67 tracks, of
which 43 are in regular passenger use, serving Metro-North. At its
opening, the train shed contained 123 tracks, including duplicate track
numbers and storage tracks, with a combined length of 19.5 miles
(31.4 km).

The tracks slope down as they exit the station to the north, to help
departing trains accelerate and arriving ones slow down. Because of the
size of the rail yards, Park Avenue and its side streets from 43rd
Street to 59th Street are raised on viaducts, and the surrounding blocks
were covered over by various buildings.

At its busiest, the terminal is served by an arriving train every 58
seconds.

Track distribution
==================

-   *North of the East Yard is the Lex Yard, a secondary storage yard
    under the Waldorf Astoria Hotel that formerly served the power plant
    for Grand Central Terminal.*

-   *The new LIRR station will have four tracks and two platforms in
    each of two caverns, and each cavern would contain two tracks and
    one platform on each level.*

The upper Metro-North level has 42 numbered tracks. Twenty-nine serve
passenger platforms; these are numbered 11 to 42, east to west (Tracks
12, 22, and 31 do not currently exist, and appear to have been removed).
To their east sits the East Yard: ten storage tracks numbered 1 through
10 from east to west. A balloon loop runs from Tracks 38–42 on the far
west side of the station, around the other tracks, and back to storage
Tracks 1–3 at the far east side of the station; this allows trains to
turn around more easily.

North of the East Yard is the Lex Yard, a secondary storage yard under
the Waldorf Astoria Hotel that formerly served the power plant for Grand
Central Terminal. Its twelve tracks are numbered 51 through 65 from east
to west (track numbers 57, 58, and 62 do not currently exist). Platforms
sit between tracks 53 and 54 and between tracks 61 and 63. Track 61 is
known for being a private track for United States President Franklin D.
Roosevelt; part of the original design of the Waldorf Astoria, it was
mentioned in The New York Times in 1929 and first used in 1938 by John
J. Pershing, a top U.S. general during World War I. Roosevelt would
travel into the city using his personal train, pull into Track 61, and
take a specially designed elevator to the surface. It has been used
occasionally since Roosevelt's death. The upper level also contains 22
more storage sidings.

The lower Metro-North level has 27 tracks numbered 100 to 126, east to
west. Two were originally intended for mail trains and two were for
baggage handling. Today, only Tracks 102–112 and 114–115 are used for
passenger service. The lower-level balloon loop, whose curve was much
sharper than that of the upper-level loop and could only handle electric
multiple units used on commuter lines was removed at an unknown date.
Tracks 116–125 were demolished to make room for the Long Island Rail
Road concourse being built under the Metro-North station as part of the
East Side Access project.

The upper and lower levels have different track layouts, so the upper
level is supported by ultra-strong columns, some of which can carry over
7,000,000 foot-pounds force (9,500,000 J).

The LIRR terminal being built as part of East Side Access will add four
platforms and eight tracks numbered 201–204 and 301–304 in two
100-foot-deep (30 m) double-decked caverns below the Metro-North
station. The new LIRR station will have four tracks and two platforms in
each of two caverns, and each cavern would contain two tracks and one
platform on each level. A mezzanine will sit on a center level between
the LIRR's two track levels.

Control center
==============

-   *Grand Central Terminal was built with five signal control centers,
    labeled A, B, C, F, and U, that collectively controlled all of the
    track interlockings around the terminal.*

Grand Central Terminal was built with five signal control centers,
labeled A, B, C, F, and U, that collectively controlled all of the track
interlockings around the terminal. Each switch was electrically
controlled by a lever in one of the signal towers, where lights
illuminated on track maps to show which switches were in use. As trains
passed a given tower, the signal controllers reported the train's engine
and timetable numbers, direction, track number, and the exact time.

Tower U controlled the interlocking between 48th and 58th Streets; Tower
C, the storage spurs; and Tower F, the turning loops. A four-story
underground tower at 49th Street housed the largest of the signal
towers: Tower A, which handled the upper-level interlockings via 400
levers, and Tower B, which handled the lower-level interlockings with
362 levers. The towers housed offices for the stationmaster, yardmaster,
car-maintenance crew, electrical crew, and track-maintenance crew. There
were also break rooms for conductors, train engineers, and engine men.

After Tower B was destroyed in a fire in 1986, the signal towers were
consolidated into a single Operations Control Center, where controllers
could monitor the switches by computer. Completed in 1993, the center is
operated by a crew of two dozen.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.9196423884514435in"}\
*Hospital room in the terminal, 1915*

Hospital
========

-   *The arrangement was satisfactory, leading to the creation of a
    permanent hospital, the Grand Central Emergency Hospital, in Grand
    Central Terminal in 1911.*

During the terminal's construction, an "accident room" was set up to
treat worker injuries in a wrecking car in the terminal's rail yard.
Later on, a small hospital was established in the temporary station
building on Lexington Avenue to care for injured workers. The
arrangement was satisfactory, leading to the creation of a permanent
hospital, the Grand Central Emergency Hospital, in Grand Central
Terminal in 1911. The hospital was used for every employee injury as
well as for passengers. In 1915, it had two physicians who treated a
monthly average of 125 new cases per month and 450 dressings. The space
had four rooms: Room A (the waiting room), Room B (the operating room),
Room C (a private office), and Room D (for resting patients). The
hospital was open at least until 1963; a Journal News article that year
noted that the hospital treated minor to moderate ailments and was open
every day between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m.

Architecture
============

-   *The east side of the station house proper is an alley called Depew
    Place, which was built along with the Grand Central Depot annex in
    the 1880s and mostly decommissioned in the 1900s when the new
    terminal was built.*

-   *Grand Central has both monumental spaces and meticulously crafted
    detail, especially on its facade.*

-   *As proposed in 1904, Grand Central Terminal was bounded by
    Vanderbilt Avenue to the west, Lexington Avenue to the east, 42nd
    Street to the south, and 45th Street to the north.*

Grand Central Terminal was designed in the Beaux-Arts style by Reed and
Stem, which was responsible for the overall design of the terminal, and
Warren and Wetmore, which mainly made cosmetic alterations to the
exterior and interior. Grand Central has both monumental spaces and
meticulously crafted detail, especially on its facade. In 2013,
historian David Cannadine described it as one of the most majestic
buildings of the twentieth century. The facade is based on an overall
exterior design by Whitney Warren. Various elements inside the terminal
were designed by French architects and artists Jules-Félix Coutan,
Sylvain Salières, and Paul César Helleu.

As proposed in 1904, Grand Central Terminal was bounded by Vanderbilt
Avenue to the west, Lexington Avenue to the east, 42nd Street to the
south, and 45th Street to the north. It included a post office on its
east side. The east side of the station house proper is an alley called
Depew Place, which was built along with the Grand Central Depot annex in
the 1880s and mostly decommissioned in the 1900s when the new terminal
was built. Originally slated to measure 680 feet (210 m) along
Vanderbilt Avenue by 300 feet (91 m) on 42nd Street, the station house
actually measures 800 feet (240 m) long, 300 feet (91 m) wide, and 105
feet (32 m) high.

Structure and materials
=======================

-   *The facade and structure of the terminal building primarily use
    granite.*

-   *The station and its rail yard have steel frames.*

The station and its rail yard have steel frames. The building also uses
large columns designed to hold the weight of a 20-story office building,
which was to be built when additional room was required.

The facade and structure of the terminal building primarily use granite.
Because granite emits radiation, people who work full-time in the
station receive an average dose of 525 mrem/year, more than permitted in
nuclear power facilities. The base of the exterior is Stony Creek
granite, while the upper portion is of Indiana limestone, from Bedford,
Indiana.

The interiors use several varieties of stone, including imitation Caen
stone for the Main Concourse; cream-colored Botticino marble for the
interior decorations; and pink Tennessee marble for the floors of the
Main Concourse, Biltmore Room, and Vanderbilt Hall, as well as the two
staircases in the Main Concourse. Real Caen stone was judged too
expensive, so the builders mixed plaster, sand, lime, and Portland
cement. Most of the remaining masonry is made from concrete. Guastavino
tiling, a fireproof tile-and-cement vault pattern patented by Rafael
Guastavino, is used in various spaces.

Facade
======

-   *In designing the facade of Grand Central, the architects wanted to
    make the building seem like a gateway to the city.*

-   *The central window resembles a triumphal arch.*

-   *Below these works, facing the Park Avenue Viaduct, is an 1869
    statue of Cornelius Vanderbilt, longtime owner of New York Central.*

-   *There are two pairs of columns on either side of the central
    window.*

In designing the facade of Grand Central, the architects wanted to make
the building seem like a gateway to the city. The south facade, facing
42nd Street, is the front side of the terminal building, and contains
large arched windows. The central window resembles a triumphal arch.
There are two pairs of columns on either side of the central window. The
columns are of the Corinthian order, and are partially attached to the
granite walls behind them, though they are detached from one another.
The facade was also designed to complement that of the New York Public
Library Main Branch, another Beaux-Arts edifice located on nearby Fifth
Avenue.

The facade includes several large works of art. At the top of the south
facade is a 13-foot-wide (4.0 m) clock, which contains the world's
largest example of Tiffany glass. The clock is surrounded by the Glory
of Commerce sculptural group, a 48-foot-wide (15 m) sculpture by
Jules-Félix Coutan, which includes representations of Minerva, Hercules,
and Mercury. At its unveiling in 1914, the work was considered the
largest sculptural group in the world. Below these works, facing the
Park Avenue Viaduct, is an 1869 statue of Cornelius Vanderbilt, longtime
owner of New York Central. Sculpted by Ernst Plassmann, the 8.5-foot
(2.6 m) bronze is the last remnant of a 150-foot bronze relief installed
at the Hudson River Railroad depot at St. John's Park; it was moved to
Grand Central Terminal in 1929.

Interior
========

-   *The Main Concourse's sets of arched windows and its east and west
    staircases were modeled after those of the Palais Garnier in Paris.*

The Main Concourse's sets of arched windows and its east and west
staircases were modeled after those of the Palais Garnier in Paris.

Main Concourse ceiling
======================

-   *By the 1940s, the ceiling had grown moldy, so in 1944, New York
    Central covered the mural with boards and painted an imitation mural
    over these boards.*

-   *A skylight was originally supposed to be installed to provide light
    into the terminal, and accommodations were made for a large ceiling
    light, in case an office building were to be constructed over the
    terminal.*

The Main Concourse's ceiling is an elliptical barrel vault, with its
base at an elevation of 121.5 feet and its crown at 160.25 feet. A
skylight was originally supposed to be installed to provide light into
the terminal, and accommodations were made for a large ceiling light, in
case an office building were to be constructed over the terminal.

The ceiling is elaborately decorated with a celestial mural, conceived
in 1912 by Warren and Helleu, and executed by Hewlett-Basing Studio. The
ceiling contains several astronomical inaccuracies: the stars within
some constellations appear correctly as they would from earth, other
constellations are reversed left-to-right, as is the overall arrangement
of the constellations on the ceiling. Though the astronomical
inconsistencies were noticed promptly by a commuter in 1913, they have
not been corrected in any of the subsequent renovations of the ceiling.

By the 1940s, the ceiling had grown moldy, so in 1944, New York Central
covered the mural with boards and painted an imitation mural over these
boards. By the 1980s, the ceiling was obscured by decades of what was
thought to be coal and diesel smoke. Spectroscopic examination revealed
that it was mostly tar and nicotine from tobacco smoke. Starting in
September 1996, the ceiling was cleaned and restored to its original
design.

There are half-moon clerestory windows on the north and south sides,
with carvings by Salières, alternately depicting a globe adorned with
Mercury's staff and a winged wheel that symbolizes the speed of the
railway, adorned with lightning bolts to symbolize the line's recent
electrification. Both designs include laurel and oak branches.

Iconography
===========

-   *In 2017, the MTA based its new logo for the terminal on the
    engraved design; MTA officials said its black and gold colors have
    long been associated with the terminal.*

-   *The overlapping letters "G", "C", and "T" are sculpted into
    multiple places in the terminal, including in friezes atop several
    windows above the terminal's ticket office.*

Many parts of the terminal are adorned with sculpted oak leaves and
acorns, nuts of the oak tree. Cornelius Vanderbilt chose the acorn as
the symbol of the Vanderbilt family, and adopted the saying "Great oaks
from little acorns grow" as the family motto. Among these decorations is
a brass acorn finial atop the four-sided clock in the center of the Main
Concourse. Other acorn or oak leaf decorations include carved wreaths
under the Main Concourse's west stairs; sculptures above the lunettes in
the Main Concourse; metalwork above the elevators; reliefs above the
train gates; and the electric chandeliers in the Main Waiting Room and
Main Concourse. These decorations were designed by Salières.

The overlapping letters "G", "C", and "T" are sculpted into multiple
places in the terminal, including in friezes atop several windows above
the terminal's ticket office. The symbol was designed with the "T"
resembling an upside-down anchor, intended as a reference to Cornelius
Vanderbilt's commercial beginnings in shipping and ferry businesses. In
2017, the MTA based its new logo for the terminal on the engraved
design; MTA officials said its black and gold colors have long been
associated with the terminal. The spur of the letter "G" has a depiction
of a railroad spike. The 2017 logo succeeded one created by the firm
Pentagram for the terminal's centennial in 2013. It depicted the Main
Concourse's ball clock set to 7:13, or 19:13 using a 24-hour clock,
referencing the terminal's completion in 1913. Both logos omit the word
"terminal" in its name, in recognition to how most people refer to the
building.

Influence
=========

-   *Among the buildings modeled on Grand Central's design is the
    Poughkeepsie station, a Metro-North and Amtrak station in
    Poughkeepsie, New York.*

-   *Additionally, Union Station in Utica, New York was partially
    designed after Grand Central, and the stage of Saturday Night Live
    was designed after the terminal as well.*

Among the buildings modeled on Grand Central's design is the
Poughkeepsie station, a Metro-North and Amtrak station in Poughkeepsie,
New York. It was also designed by Warren and Wetmore and opened in 1918.
Additionally, Union Station in Utica, New York was partially designed
after Grand Central, and the stage of Saturday Night Live was designed
after the terminal as well.

Related structures
==================

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.4810126859142607in"}\
*Illustration showing the viaduct as it approaches and wraps around
Grand Central, 1913*

Park Avenue Viaduct
===================

-   *The viaduct was built to facilitate traffic along 42nd Street and
    along Park Avenue, then New York City's only discontinuous major
    north-south avenue.*

-   *The viaduct rises from street level on 40th Street south of Grand
    Central, splits into eastern (northbound) and western (southbound)
    legs above the terminal building's main entrance, and continues
    north around the station building, directly above portions of its
    main level.*

The Park Avenue Viaduct is an elevated road that carries Park Avenue
around the terminal building and the MetLife Building and through the
Helmsley Building — three buildings that lie across the line of the
avenue. The viaduct rises from street level on 40th Street south of
Grand Central, splits into eastern (northbound) and western (southbound)
legs above the terminal building's main entrance, and continues north
around the station building, directly above portions of its main level.
The legs of the viaduct pass around the MetLife Building, into the
Helmsley Building, and re-emerge at street level on 46th Street.

The viaduct was built to facilitate traffic along 42nd Street and along
Park Avenue, then New York City's only discontinuous major north-south
avenue. When the western leg of the viaduct was completed in 1919, it
also served as a second level for picking up and dropping off
passengers. In 1928, an eastern leg for northbound traffic was added to
reduce congestion. A sidewalk, accessible from the Grand Hyatt hotel,
runs parallel to 42nd Street.

Post office and baggage building
================================

-   *Grand Central Terminal has a post office at 450 Lexington Avenue,
    built from 1906 to 1909.*

-   *From the beginning, Grand Central's post office was designed to
    handle massive volumes of mail, though it was not as large as the
    James A. Farley Building, the post office that was built with the
    original Penn Station.*

-   *Biltmore Hotel guests arriving at Grand Central could get baggage
    delivered to their rooms.*

Grand Central Terminal has a post office at 450 Lexington Avenue, built
from 1906 to 1909. The architecture of the original post office building
matches that of the terminal, as the structures were designed by the
same architects. The post office station expanded into a second
building, directly north of the original structure, in 1915. From the
beginning, Grand Central's post office was designed to handle massive
volumes of mail, though it was not as large as the James A. Farley
Building, the post office that was built with the original Penn Station.

The terminal complex originally included a six-story building for
baggage handling just north of the main station building. Departing
passengers unloaded their luggage from taxis or personal vehicles on the
Park Avenue Viaduct, and elevators brought it to the baggage passageways
(now part of Grand Central North), where trucks brought the luggage to
the respective platforms. The process was reversed for arriving
passengers. Biltmore Hotel guests arriving at Grand Central could get
baggage delivered to their rooms. The baggage building was later
converted to an office building. The structure was demolished in 1961 to
make way for the MetLife Building.

Subway station
==============

-   *There was also a fourth line connected to Grand Central Terminal: a
    spur of the IRT Third Avenue elevated, which stopped at Grand
    Central starting in 1878; it was made obsolete by the subway's
    opening, and closed in 1923.*

-   *During the terminal's construction, there were proposals to allow
    commuter trains to pass through Grand Central and continue into the
    subway tracks, but they were deemed impractical.*

The terminal's subway station, dubbed Grand Central–42nd Street, serves
three lines: the IRT Lexington Avenue Line (serving the 4, ​5, ​6, and
&lt;6&gt; trains), the IRT Flushing Line (serving the 7 and &lt;7&gt;​
trains), and the IRT 42nd Street Shuttle to Times Square. Built by the
Interborough Rapid Transit Company (IRT), the lines are now operated by
the MTA as part of the New York City Subway.

The Main Concourse is connected to the subway platforms' mezzanine via
the Shuttle Passage. The platforms can also be reached from the 42nd
Street Passage via stairs, escalators, and an elevator to the fare
control area for the Lexington Avenue and Flushing Lines.

The 42nd Street Shuttle platforms, located just below ground level,
opened in 1904 as an express stop on the original IRT subway. The
Lexington Avenue Line's platforms, which were opened in 1918 when the
original IRT subway platforms were converted to shuttle use, run
underneath the southeastern corner of the station building at a
45-degree angle, to the east of and at a lower level than the shuttle
platforms. The Flushing Line platform opened in 1915; it is deeper than
the Lexington Avenue Line's platforms because it is part of the Steinway
Tunnel, a former streetcar tunnel that descends under the East River to
the east of Grand Central. There was also a fourth line connected to
Grand Central Terminal: a spur of the IRT Third Avenue elevated, which
stopped at Grand Central starting in 1878; it was made obsolete by the
subway's opening, and closed in 1923.

During the terminal's construction, there were proposals to allow
commuter trains to pass through Grand Central and continue into the
subway tracks, but they were deemed impractical.

History
=======

-   *Three buildings serving essentially the same function have stood on
    the current Grand Central Terminal's site.*

Three buildings serving essentially the same function have stood on the
current Grand Central Terminal's site.

![](media/image3.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.631162510936133in"}\
*Grand Central Depot*

![](media/image4.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.378980752405949in"}\
*Grand Central Station, c. 1902*

Predecessors
============

-   *Grand Central Terminal arose from a need to build a central station
    for the Hudson River Railroad, the New York and Harlem Railroad, and
    the New York and New Haven Railroad in what is now Midtown
    Manhattan.*

-   *William J. Wilgus, the New York Central's vice president, later
    wrote a letter to New York Central president William H. Newman.*

Grand Central Terminal arose from a need to build a central station for
the Hudson River Railroad, the New York and Harlem Railroad, and the New
York and New Haven Railroad in what is now Midtown Manhattan. The Harlem
Railroad originally ran as a steam railroad on street level along Fourth
Avenue (now Park Avenue), while the New Haven Railroad ran along the
Harlem's tracks in Manhattan per a trackage agreement. The business
magnate Cornelius Vanderbilt bought the Hudson River and New York
Central Railroads in 1867, and merged them two years later. Vanderbilt
developed a proposal to unite the three separate railroads at a single
central station, replacing the separate and adjacent stations that
created chaos in baggage transfer.

Vanderbilt commissioned John B. Snook to design his new station, dubbed
Grand Central Depot, on the site of the 42nd Street depot. Snook's final
design was in the Second Empire style. Construction started on September
1, 1869, and the depot was completed by October 1871. Due to frequent
accidents between pedestrians and trains running on street level,
Vanderbilt proposed the Fourth Avenue Improvement Project in 1872. The
improvements were completed in 1874, allowing trains approaching Grand
Central Depot from the north to descend into the Park Avenue Tunnel at
96th Street and continue underground into the new depot. Traffic at
Grand Central Depot grew quickly, filling its 12 tracks to capacity by
the mid-1890s, not the late 1890s or early 1900s as expected. In 1885, a
seven-track annex with five platforms was added to the east side of the
existing terminal.

Grand Central Depot had reached its capacity again by the late 1890s,
and it carried 11.5 million passengers a year by 1897. As a result, the
railroads renovated the head house extensively based on plans by
railroad architect Bradford Gilbert. The reconstructed building was
renamed Grand Central Station. The new waiting room opened in October
1900.

As train traffic increased in the late 1890s and early 1900s, so did the
problems of smoke and soot produced by steam locomotives in the Park
Avenue Tunnel, the only approach to the station. This contributed to a
crash on January 8, 1902, when a southbound train overran signals in the
smoky Park Avenue Tunnel and collided with another southbound train,
killing 15 people and injuring more than 30 others. Shortly afterward,
the New York state legislature passed a law to ban all steam trains in
Manhattan by 1908. William J. Wilgus, the New York Central's vice
president, later wrote a letter to New York Central president William H.
Newman. Wilgus proposed to electrify and place the tracks to Grand
Central in tunnels, as well as constructing a new railway terminal with
two levels of tracks and making other infrastructure improvements. In
March 1903, Wilgus presented a more detailed proposal to the New York
Central board. The railroad's board of directors approved the \$35
million project in June 1903; ultimately, almost all of Wilgus's
proposal would be implemented.

![](media/image5.jpg){width="5.5in" height="2.5807108486439194in"}\
*Proposal of the associated architects of Grand Central, 1905*

Replacement
===========

-   *The new terminal was opened on February 2, 1913.*

-   *The entire building was to be torn down in phases and replaced by
    the current Grand Central Terminal.*

-   *Construction on Grand Central Terminal started on June 19, 1903.*

-   *In 1903, New York Central invited four architecture firms to a
    design competition to decide who would design the new terminal.*

The entire building was to be torn down in phases and replaced by the
current Grand Central Terminal. It was to be the biggest terminal in the
world, both in the size of the building and in the number of tracks. The
Grand Central Terminal project was divided into eight phases, though the
construction of the terminal itself comprised only two of these phases.

The current building was intended to compete with the since-demolished
Pennsylvania Station, a majestic electric-train hub being built on
Manhattan's west side for arch-rival Pennsylvania Railroad by McKim,
Mead & White. In 1903, New York Central invited four architecture firms
to a design competition to decide who would design the new terminal.
Reed and Stem were ultimately selected, as were Warren and Wetmore, who
were not part of the original competition. Reed and Stem were
responsible for the overall design of the station, while Warren and
Wetmore worked on designing the station's Beaux-Arts exterior. However,
the team had a tense relationship due to constant design disputes.

Construction on Grand Central Terminal started on June 19, 1903. Wilgus
proposed to demolish, excavate, and built the terminal in three sections
or "bites", to prevent railroad service from being interrupted during
construction. About 3,200,000 cubic yards (2,400,000 m3) of the ground
were excavated at depths of up to 10 floors, with 1,000 cubic yards
(760 m3) of debris being removed from the site daily. Over 10,000
workers were assigned to the project. The total cost of improvements,
including electrification and the development of Park Avenue, was
estimated at \$180 million in 1910. Electric trains on the Hudson Line
started running to Grand Central on September 30, 1906, and the segments
of all three lines running into Grand Central had been electrified by
1907.

After the last train left Grand Central Station at midnight on June 5,
1910, workers promptly began demolishing the old station. The last
remaining tracks from the former Grand Central Station were
decommissioned on June 21, 1912. The new terminal was opened on February
2, 1913.

Heyday
======

-   *Passenger traffic grew so rapidly that by 1918, New York Central
    proposed expanding Grand Central Terminal.*

-   *The new electric service led to increased development in New York
    City's suburbs, and passenger traffic on the commuter lines into
    Grand Central more than doubled in the seven years following the
    terminal's completion.*

-   *In 1923, the Grand Central Art Galleries opened in the terminal.*

The terminal spurred development in the surrounding area, particularly
in Terminal City, a commercial and office district created above where
the tracks were covered. The development of Terminal City also included
the construction of the Park Avenue Viaduct, surrounding the station, in
the 1920s. The new electric service led to increased development in New
York City's suburbs, and passenger traffic on the commuter lines into
Grand Central more than doubled in the seven years following the
terminal's completion. Passenger traffic grew so rapidly that by 1918,
New York Central proposed expanding Grand Central Terminal.

In 1923, the Grand Central Art Galleries opened in the terminal. A year
after it opened, the galleries established the Grand Central School of
Art, which occupied 7,000 square feet (650 m2) on the seventh floor of
the east wing of the terminal. The Grand Central School of Art remained
in the east wing until 1944, and it moved to the Biltmore Hotel in 1958.

![](media/image6.jpg){width="5.186274059492564in" height="5.5in"}\
*The Main Concourse in 1986, featuring the Kodak Colorama, the
illuminated clock, and two banks*

Decline
=======

-   *After Penn Central went into bankruptcy in 1970, it retained title
    to Grand Central Terminal.*

-   *The new corporation proposed to demolish Grand Central Terminal and
    replace it with a skyscraper, as the Pennsylvania Railroad had done
    with the original Penn Station in 1963.*

-   *In 1968, New York Central, facing bankruptcy, merged with the
    Pennsylvania Railroad to form the Penn Central Railroad.*

In 1947, over 65 million people traveled through Grand Central, an
all-time high. The station's decline came soon afterward with the
beginning of the Jet Age and the construction of the Interstate Highway
System. There were multiple proposals to alter the terminal, including
several replacing the station building with a skyscraper; none of the
plans were carried out. The Pan Am Building (now the MetLife Building)
was ultimately erected behind Grand Central to the north, and opened in
1963.

In 1968, New York Central, facing bankruptcy, merged with the
Pennsylvania Railroad to form the Penn Central Railroad. The new
corporation proposed to demolish Grand Central Terminal and replace it
with a skyscraper, as the Pennsylvania Railroad had done with the
original Penn Station in 1963. However, the New York City Landmarks
Preservation Commission, which had designated Grand Central a city
landmark in 1967, refused to consider the plans. The resulting lawsuit
went to the Supreme Court of the United States, which ruled in favor of
the city. After Penn Central went into bankruptcy in 1970, it retained
title to Grand Central Terminal. When Penn Central reorganized as
American Premier Underwriters (APU) in 1994, it retained ownership of
Penn Central. In turn, APU was absorbed by American Financial Group.

Grand Central and the surrounding neighborhood became dilapidated during
the 1970s, and the interior of Grand Central was dominated by huge
billboard advertisements, which included the Kodak Colorama photos and
the Westclox "Big Ben" clock. In 1975, Donald Trump bought the Commodore
Hotel to the east of the terminal for \$10 million and then worked out a
deal with Jay Pritzker to transform it into one of the first Grand Hyatt
hotels. Grand Central Terminal was listed on the National Register of
Historic Places in 1975 and declared a National Historic Landmark in the
following year. This period was marked by a bombing on September 11,
1976, when a group of Croatian nationalists planted a bomb in a coin
locker at Grand Central Terminal and hijacked a plane; the bomb was not
disarmed properly, and the explosion injured three NYPD officers and
killed one bomb squad specialist.

The final Amtrak train stopped at Grand Central on April 7, 1991, upon
the completion of the Empire Connection on Manhattan's West Side. The
connection allowed trains using the Empire Corridor from Albany,
Toronto, and Montreal to use Penn Station. However, some Amtrak trains
would use Grand Central during the summers of 2017 and 2018.

Renovation and subsequent expansions
====================================

-   *In February 2019, it was announced that the Grand Hyatt New York
    hotel that abuts Grand Central Terminal to the east would be torn
    down and replaced with a larger mixed-use structure over the next
    several years.*

-   *In 1988, the MTA commissioned a study of the Grand Central
    Terminal, which concluded that parts of the terminal could be turned
    into a retail area.*

In 1988, the MTA commissioned a study of the Grand Central Terminal,
which concluded that parts of the terminal could be turned into a retail
area. The agency announced an \$113.8 million renovation of the terminal
in 1995. During this renovation, all billboards were removed and the
station was restored. The most striking effect was the restoration of
the Main Concourse ceiling, revealing the painted skyscape and
constellations. The renovations included the construction of the East
Stairs, a curved monumental staircase on the east side of the station
building that matched the West Stairs. An official re-dedication
ceremony was held on October 1, 1998, marking the completion of the
interior renovations.

On February 1, 2013, numerous displays, performances, and events were
held to celebrate the terminal's centennial. The MTA awarded contracts
to replace the display boards and public announcement systems and add
security cameras at Grand Central Terminal in December 2017. The MTA
also proposed to repair the Grand Central Terminal train shed's concrete
and steel as part of the 2020–2024 MTA Capital Program. In February
2019, it was announced that the Grand Hyatt New York hotel that abuts
Grand Central Terminal to the east would be torn down and replaced with
a larger mixed-use structure over the next several years.

The East Side Access project, underway since 2007, is slated to bring
Long Island Rail Road trains into the terminal when completed. LIRR
trains will reach Grand Central from Harold Interlocking in Sunnyside,
Queens, via the existing 63rd Street Tunnel and new tunnels under
construction on both the Manhattan and Queens sides. LIRR trains will
arrive and depart from a bi-level, eight-track tunnel with four
platforms more than 90 feet (27 m) below the Metro-North tracks. The
project includes a new 350,000-square-foot retail and dining concourse
and new entrances at 45th, 46th, and 48th streets. Cost estimates have
jumped from \$4.4 billion in 2004, to \$6.4 billion in 2006, then to
\$11.1 billion. The new stations and tunnels are to begin service in
December 2022.

In December 2006, American Financial sold Grand Central Terminal to
Midtown TDR Ventures, LLC, an investment group controlled by Argent
Ventures, which renegotiated the lease with the MTA until 2274. In
November 2018, the MTA proposed to buy the station and the Hudson and
Harlem Lines for up to \$35.065 million, using the only purchase window
specified in the lease: April 2017 to October 2019. The MTA's finance
committee approved the proposal on November 13, 2018, and the full board
approved it two days later.

Innovations
===========

![](media/image7.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.689623797025372in"}\
*Cutaway drawing, illustrating the use of ramps, express and suburban
tracks, and the viaduct*

Passenger improvements
======================

-   *Initially, Grand Central was to have had two concourses, one on
    each level.*

-   *Every train at Grand Central Terminal departs one minute later than
    its posted departure time.*

-   *Grand Central Terminal offered several innovations in transit-hub
    design.*

-   *Designers of the new terminal tried to make it as comfortable as
    possible.*

Grand Central Terminal offered several innovations in transit-hub
design. One was the use of ramps, rather than staircases, to conduct
passengers and luggage through the facility. Two ramps connected the
lower-level suburban concourse to the main concourse; several more led
from the main concourse to entrances on 42nd Street. These ramps allowed
all types of travelers to easily move between Grand Central's two
underground levels. There were also 15 passenger elevators and six
freight-and-passenger elevators scattered around the station. The
separation of commuter and intercity trains, as well as incoming and
outgoing trains, ensured that most passengers on a given ramp would be
traveling in the same direction. At its opening in 1913, the terminal
was theoretically able to accommodate 100 million passengers a year.

The Park Avenue Viaduct, which wrapped around the terminal, allowed Park
Avenue traffic to bypass the building without being diverted onto nearby
streets, and reconnected the only north-south avenue in midtown
Manhattan that had an interruption in it. The station building was also
designed to accommodate reconnecting both segments of 43rd Street by
going through the concourse, if the City of New York had demanded it.

Designers of the new terminal tried to make it as comfortable as
possible. Amenities included an oak-floored waiting room for women,
attended to by maids; a shoeshine room, also for women; a room with
telephones; a beauty salon with gender-separated portions; a dressing
room, with maids available for a fee; and a men's barbershop for men,
containing a public portion with barbers from many cultures, as well as
a rentable private portion. Initially, Grand Central was to have had two
concourses, one on each level. The "outbound" concourse would have a
15,000-person capacity while the "inbound" concourse would have an
8,000-person capacity. A waiting room adjoining each concourse could fit
another 5,000 people. Brochures advertised the new Grand Central
Terminal as a tourist-friendly space where "\[t\]imid travelers may ask
questions with no fear of being rebuffed by hurrying trainmen, or
imposed upon by hotel runners, chauffeurs or others in blue uniforms"; a
safe and welcoming place for people of all cultures, where "special
accommodations are to be provided for immigrants and gangs of laborers";
and a general tourist attraction "where one delights to loiter, admiring
its beauty and symmetrical lines—a poem in stone". The waiting room by
the Main Concourse, now Vanderbilt Hall, also had an advantage over
many, including Penn Station's: Grand Central's waiting room was a
tranquil place to wait, with all ticket booths, information desks,
baggage areas, and meeting areas instead removed to the Main Concourse.

Every train at Grand Central Terminal departs one minute later than its
posted departure time. The extra minute is intended to encourage
passengers rushing to catch trains at the last minute to slow down.
According to The Atlantic, Grand Central Terminal has the lowest rate of
slips, trips, and falls on its marble floors, compared to all other
stations in the U.S. with similar flooring.

All of the terminal's light fixtures are bare light bulbs. At the time
of the terminal's construction, electricity was still a relatively new
invention, and the inclusion of electric light bulbs showcased this
innovation. In 2009, the incandescent light bulbs were replaced with
energy- and money-saving fluorescent lamp fixtures.

When Grand Central Terminal opened, it hired two types of porters,
marked with different-colored caps, to assist passengers. Porters with
red caps served as bellhops, rolling luggage around Grand Central
Terminal, and were rarely paid tips. There were more than five hundred
red-capped porters at one point. Porters with green caps, a position
introduced in 1922, provided information services, sending out or
receiving telegrams or phone messages for a fee. They later started
dropping off and picking up packages as well. There were only twelve
green-capped porters, as well as two messengers who brought messages to
an exchange on the west side of the terminal.

Track improvements
==================

-   *Grand Central Terminal was built to handle 200 trains per hour,
    though actual traffic never came close to that.*

Grand Central Terminal was built to handle 200 trains per hour, though
actual traffic never came close to that. It had 46 tracks and 30
platforms, more than twice Penn Station's 21 tracks and 11 platforms.
Its 70-acre (28 ha) rail yard could hold 1,149 cars, far more than the
366 in its predecessor station, and it dwarfed Penn Station's 28-acre
(11 ha) yard.

As constructed, the upper level was for intercity trains, and the lower
level for commuter trains. This allowed commuter and intercity
passengers to board and get off trains without interfering with each
other.

Balloon loops surrounding the station eliminated the need for
complicated switching moves to bring the trains to the coach yards for
service. At the time, passenger cars did not run on their own power, but
were pulled by locomotives, and it was believed dangerous to perform
locomotive shunting moves underground. Trains would drop passengers off
at one side of the station, perhaps be stored or serviced in the rail
yard, then use the turning loops and pick up passengers on the other
side. The loops extended under Vanderbilt Avenue to the west and
Lexington Avenue to the east.

Terminal City
=============

-   *The blocks on the north side of the terminal were later dubbed
    "Terminal City" or the "Grand Central Zone".*

-   *In 1903, the New York Central Railroad created a derivative, the
    New York State Realty and Terminal Company, to oversee construction
    above Grand Central's rail yards.*

-   *The first building in Terminal City was the new Grand Central
    Palace, which opened in 1911 and replaced a predecessor building of
    the same name.*

Burying the terminal's tracks and platforms also allowed the railroads
to sell above-ground air rights for real-estate development. Grand
Central's construction thus produced several blocks of prime real estate
in Manhattan, stretching from 42nd to 51st Streets between Madison and
Lexington Avenues. William Wilgus saw these air rights as merely a means
to fund the terminal's construction. Reed & Stem originally proposed a
"Court of Honor" for this space, while other proposals included a new
Metropolitan Opera House, a Madison Square Garden, or a National Academy
of Design building. Instead, the area was developed into a commercial
office district. One early proposed name for this area was "Pershing
Square", a name that was ultimately applied to the southern side of
Grand Central Terminal. The blocks on the north side of the terminal
were later dubbed "Terminal City" or the "Grand Central Zone". In
conjunction with this project, the segment of Park Avenue above Grand
Central's rail yards received a landscaped median and was widened to 140
feet (43 m).

Planning for the development began long before the terminal was
completed. In 1903, the New York Central Railroad created a derivative,
the New York State Realty and Terminal Company, to oversee construction
above Grand Central's rail yards. The New Haven Railroad joined the
venture later on. By 1906, news of the plans for Grand Central was
already boosting the values of nearby properties. By the time the
terminal opened in 1913, the blocks surrounding it were each valued at
\$2 million to \$3 million. Terminal City soon became Manhattan's most
desirable commercial and office district. From 1904 to 1926, land values
along Park Avenue doubled, and land values in the Terminal City area
increased 244%.

The Realty and Terminal Company typically either constructed the
structures and rented them out, or sold the air rights to private
developers who would construct their own buildings. The first building
in Terminal City was the new Grand Central Palace, which opened in 1911
and replaced a predecessor building of the same name. The district came
to include the Chrysler Building and other prestigious office buildings;
luxury apartment houses along Park Avenue; an array of high-end hotels
that included the Commodore, Biltmore, Roosevelt, Marguery, Chatham,
Barclay, Park Lane, and Waldorf Astoria; the Grand Central Palace; and
the Yale Club of New York City. The structures immediately around Grand
Central Terminal had been developed shortly after the terminal's
opening, while the structures along Park Avenue were constructed through
the 1920s and 1930s.

These structures were designed in the neoclassical style, complementing
the terminal's architecture. Although Warren and Whitmore designed most
of these buildings, it also monitored other architects' plans (such as
those of James Gamble Rogers, who designed the Yale Club) to ensure that
the style of the new buildings was compatible with that of Terminal
City. In general, the site plan of Terminal City was derived from the
City Beautiful movement, which encouraged aesthetic harmony between
adjacent buildings. The consistency of the architectural styles, as well
as the vast funding provided by investment bankers, contributed to
Terminal City's success.

The Graybar Building, completed in 1927, was one of the last projects of
Terminal City. The building incorporates many of Grand Central's train
platforms, as well as the Graybar Passage, a hallway with vendors and
train gates stretching from the terminal to Lexington Avenue. In 1929,
New York Central built its headquarters in a 34-story building, now
called the Helmsley Building, which straddled Park Avenue north of the
terminal. Development slowed drastically during the Great Depression,
and part of Terminal City was gradually razed or reconstructed with
steel-and-glass designs after World War II. In particular, many of the
low-rise residential structures on Park Avenue were replaced with
International Style skyscrapers during the 1950s and 1960s, many of
which were zoned for commercial use. Some residential buildings from the
era still exist along Lexington Avenue. Remnants of the neoclassical
design can also be seen in the Yale Club and Roosevelt Hotel on
Vanderbilt Avenue.

The area shares similar boundaries as the Grand Central Business
Improvement District, a neighborhood with businesses collectively
funding improvements and maintenance in the area. The district is
well-funded; in 1990 it had the largest budget of any business
improvement district in the United States. The district's organization
and operation is run by the Grand Central Partnership, which has given
free tours of the station building. The partnership has also funded some
restoration projects around the terminal, including installation of
lamps to illuminate its facade, purchase of a streetlamp that used to
stand on the Park Avenue Viaduct.

Emergency services
==================

-   *The terminal is served by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
    Police Department, whose Fifth District is headquartered in a
    station on the Dining Concourse.*

-   *Fire and medical emergency services are provided by the Grand
    Central Fire Brigade, a volunteer entity formed in 1987.*

-   *Various actions by MTA officers in the terminal have received media
    attention over the years.*

The terminal is served by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
Police Department, whose Fifth District is headquartered in a station on
the Dining Concourse. Various actions by MTA officers in the terminal
have received media attention over the years. In 1988, seven officers
were suspended for behaving inappropriately, including harassing a
homeless man and patrolling unclothed. In the early 2000s, officers
arrested two transgender people — Dean Spade in 2002 and Helena Stone in
2006 — who were attempting to use restrooms aligning with their gender
identities. Lawsuits forced the MTA to drop the charges and to
thenceforth allow use of restrooms according to gender identity. In
2017, an officer assaulted and arrested a conductor who was removing a
passenger from a train in the terminal.

Fire and medical emergency services are provided by the Grand Central
Fire Brigade, a volunteer entity formed in 1987. One of six such units
in the Metro-North system, the brigade is made up of Metro-North
employees, most of which are blue-collar workers: plumbers,
electricians, machinists, and custodians. Every member is a volunteer,
except for the fire chief. All receive at least 150 hours of training;
EMS-certified members get an additional 170 hours every three years. The
brigade handles an average of two emergencies a day, mostly medical in
nature. The brigade regularly trains the NYPD, FDNY, and MTA Police to
navigate the terminal and its miles of tunnels, and trains other
Metro-North employees in first aid and CPR. It also conducts fire drills
and stations fire guards for special events in the terminal.

The brigade's fleet, stored in a bay next to Track 14, includes three
electric carts equipped with sirens and red lights: a white-painted
ambulance no wider than a hospital bed that carries a stretcher, oxygen
tanks, defibrillators, and other medical equipment; a red pumper that
carries 200 gallons of water and 300 feet of fire hose; and a red rescue
truck with air packs, forcible entry tools, and turnout gear.

Art installations and performances
==================================

-   *Among the permanent works of public art in Grand Central are the
    celestial ceiling in the Main Concourse, the Glory of Commerce work,
    the statue of Cornelius Vanderbilt in front of the building's south
    facade, and the two cast-iron eagle statues adorning the terminal's
    facades.*

-   *The terminal is also known for its performance and installation
    art, including flash mobs and other spontaneous events.*

Among the permanent works of public art in Grand Central are the
celestial ceiling in the Main Concourse, the Glory of Commerce work, the
statue of Cornelius Vanderbilt in front of the building's south facade,
and the two cast-iron eagle statues adorning the terminal's facades.
Temporary works, exhibitions, and events are regularly mounted in
Vanderbilt Hall, while the Dining Concourse features temporary exhibits
in a series of lightboxes.

The terminal is also known for its performance and installation art,
including flash mobs and other spontaneous events.

In popular culture
==================

-   *Grand Central Terminal has been the subject, inspiration, or
    location for literature, television and radio episodes, and films.*

Grand Central Terminal has been the subject, inspiration, or location
for literature, television and radio episodes, and films.

Film and television
===================

-   *Kyle McCarthy, who handles production at Grand Central, said,
    "Grand Central is one of the quintessential New York places.*

-   *A television show in which Grand Central is depicted is Saturday
    Night Live, where a soundstage reconstruction of the terminal is
    shown.*

-   *Some films from the 20th century, including Grand Central Murder,
    The Thin Man Goes Home, Hello, Dolly!, and Beneath the Planet of the
    Apes used reconstructions of Grand Central, built in Hollywood, to
    stand in for the terminal.*

Many film and television productions have included scenes shot in the
terminal. Kyle McCarthy, who handles production at Grand Central, said,
"Grand Central is one of the quintessential New York places. Whether
filmmakers need an establishing shot of arriving in New York or
transportation scenes, the restored landmark building is visually
appealing and authentic." Especially during World War II, Grand Central
has been a backdrop for romantic reunions between couples. After the
terminal declined in the 1950s, it was more frequently used as a dark,
dangerous place, even a metaphor for chaos and disorientation, featuring
chase scenes, shootouts, homeless people, and the mentally ill. In the
1990 film The Freshman, for example, Matthew Broderick's character
stumbles over an unconscious man and watches fearfully as petty crimes
take place around him.

Almost every scene in the terminal's train shed was shot on Track 34,
one of the few platforms without columns.

The first filmed scene in which Grand Central Terminal appears may be
the 1909 short comedy Mr. Jones Has a Card Party. The terminal's first
cinematic appearance was in the 1930 musical film Puttin' On the Ritz,
and its first Technicolor appearance was in the 1953 film The Band
Wagon. Some films from the 20th century, including Grand Central Murder,
The Thin Man Goes Home, Hello, Dolly!, and Beneath the Planet of the
Apes used reconstructions of Grand Central, built in Hollywood, to stand
in for the terminal. Additionally, the terminal was drawn and animated
for use in the 2005 animated film Madagascar.

Other films in which the terminal appears include:

On October 19, 2017, several of these films were screened in the
terminal for an event created by the MTA, Rooftop Films, and the Museum
of the Moving Image and featuring a cinematic history lecture by
architect and author James Sanders.

A television show in which Grand Central is depicted is Saturday Night
Live, where a soundstage reconstruction of the terminal is shown.

Other
=====

-   *The dangerous life of homeless men and women in Grand Central and
    its tunnels and passageways inspired Lee Stringer's Grand Central
    Winter: Stories from the Street and Tina S.' collaboration with
    journalist Jamie Pastor Bolnick in the autobiography Living at the
    Edge of the World: A Teenager's Survival in the Tunnels of Grand
    Central Station.*

-   *Grand Central Station, an NBC radio drama set at the terminal, ran
    from 1937 to 1953.*

Literature featuring the terminal includes Report on Grand Central
Terminal, written in 1948 by nuclear physicist Leo Szilard; The Catcher
in the Rye by J. D. Salinger; The House of Mirth by Edith Wharton; Grand
Central Murder by Sue MacVeigh, which was made into the eponymous film
in 1942; A Stranger Is Watching by Mary Higgins Clark; and the 1946
children's classic The Taxi That Hurried by Lucy Sprague Mitchell. The
infrastructure in Grand Central inspired the novel The Invention of Hugo
Cabret, and in turn, the film Hugo. The dangerous life of homeless men
and women in Grand Central and its tunnels and passageways inspired Lee
Stringer's Grand Central Winter: Stories from the Street and Tina S.'
collaboration with journalist Jamie Pastor Bolnick in the autobiography
Living at the Edge of the World: A Teenager's Survival in the Tunnels of
Grand Central Station.

Grand Central Station, an NBC radio drama set at the terminal, ran from
1937 to 1953. Among the video games that feature the terminal are
Spider-Man: The Movie and True Crime: New York City.

See also
========

-   *Transportation in New York City*

-   *Architecture of New York City*

Architecture of New York City

Transportation in New York City

List of busiest railway stations in North America

References
==========

Explanatory notes
=================

Citations
=========

General references
==================

Further reading
===============

External links
==============

-   *Media related to Grand Central Terminal at Wikimedia Commons*

Media related to Grand Central Terminal at Wikimedia Commons

Official website

Station listing

Coordinates: 40°45′10.127″N 73°58′37.974″W﻿ / ﻿40.75281306°N
73.97721500°W﻿ / 40.75281306; -73.97721500
