**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Groove\_101.7FM\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Groove 101.7FM
==============

-   *Groove 101.7FM (ACMA callsign: 6YMS) was a Western Australian
    community radio station broadcasting from studios located in
    Carlisle, owned and operated by the Youth Media Society of Western
    Australia Incorporated.*

Groove 101.7FM (ACMA callsign: 6YMS) was a Western Australian community
radio station broadcasting from studios located in Carlisle, owned and
operated by the Youth Media Society of Western Australia Incorporated.
First broadcast in March 2003, the station was closed in March 2008.

History
=======

-   *In September 2003, the Australian Broadcasting Authority launched
    an investigation into the station, following a complaint from DMG
    Radio Australia, the parent company of commercial radio station Nova
    93.7, citing possible breaches of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992
    and the Community Broadcasting Association of Australia's Code of
    Practice.*

-   *Groove 101.7FM was first broadcast in July 2002 as a 12-hour
    service, broadcasting to the Perth area on 101.7FM between; the
    frequency shared with Capital Community Radio.*

Groove 101.7FM was first broadcast in July 2002 as a 12-hour service,
broadcasting to the Perth area on 101.7FM between; the frequency shared
with Capital Community Radio. The station, with its youth format, was in
October 2002 awarded a full-time licence by the Australian Broadcasting
Authority, beginning 24-hour transmissions on 1 March 2003. As Youth
Media Society of Western Australia Inc., the station offered a
subscription program, encouraging members from the community served by
the station to offer financial support through sponsorship and to be
part of the decision making processes, by election to the Committee of
Management and appointment to the Sub-Committees.

In September 2003, the Australian Broadcasting Authority launched an
investigation into the station, following a complaint from DMG Radio
Australia, the parent company of commercial radio station Nova 93.7,
citing possible breaches of the Broadcasting Services Act 1992 and the
Community Broadcasting Association of Australia's Code of Practice.
Before the investigation was handed down, in July 2004, the Authority
was informed that the station's Chief Executive and President, and the
Secretary "will no longer be associated with Groove FM". In handing down
the report, the Authority found the station "does not continue to
represent the community interest that it represented at the time when
the licence was allocated to it" and "does not encourage members of the
community that it serves to participate in the operations of the
licensee". In response, additional licence conditions were imposed on
the service, regarding corporate governance, Australian music and talk
content, and compliance with the Broadcasting Services Act and the
Community Broadcasting Codes of Practice. In December, a settlement was
made between the licensee and the Australian Communications and Media
Authority, following an Administrative Appeals Tribunal review was
sought by the station.

In September 2006, the station was investigated by the Australian
Communications and Media Authority, following a complaint that suggested
a breach in licence conditions relating to Australian music content,
talk programming and on-air promotion of participation in the
organisation. No further action was taken, despite the breaches of
various codes. However, in February 2008, the ACMA announced that the
station's licence would not be renewed. Groove 101.7FM was shut down on
10 March 2008.

The 101.7 FM frequency is currently occupied by seniors community
broadcaster Capital 101.7FM.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Groove 101.7FM website*

Groove 101.7FM website

Coordinates: 31°58′49″S 115°54′01″E﻿ / ﻿31.98016°S 115.9003°E﻿ /
-31.98016; 115.9003
