**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guido\_Dal\_Cas%C3%B3n\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Guido Dal Casón
===============

-   *Guido Walter Dal Casón (born 4 March 1993) is an Argentine
    professional footballer who plays as a forward for San Telmo.*

Guido Walter Dal Casón (born 4 March 1993) is an Argentine professional
footballer who plays as a forward for San Telmo.

Career
======

Club
====

-   *January 2019 saw Dal Casón sign for San Telmo in Primera B
    Metropolitana.*

-   *Dal Casón spent time in the youth of Quilmes.*

-   *Dal Casón left his Gimnasia y Esgrima loan in July 2018.*

-   *On 22 August 2016, Dal Casón was loaned to All Boys of Primera B
    Nacional.*

-   *In January 2015, Dal Casón joined fellow Primera División team
    Defensa y Justicia.*

Dal Casón spent time in the youth of Quilmes. He never featured for the
first-team in the Argentine Primera División, but was loaned out between
2013 and 2014 to Uruguayan Primera División team Racing Club. He made
his professional debut on 20 October 2013 against Juventud, before
featuring again six days later vs. Sud América. Those were his only two
appearances for Racing Club. In January 2015, Dal Casón joined fellow
Primera División team Defensa y Justicia. His first appearance in the
Argentine top-flight arrived on 27 September 2015 in a home loss to
ex-club Quilmes. Two more games came.

On 22 August 2016, Dal Casón was loaned to All Boys of Primera B
Nacional. He went onto score four goals in twenty-eight games for All
Boys. Dal Casón departed Defensa in September 2017 to sign for Primera B
Nacional side Gimnasia y Esgrima. He scored in his first start for the
club, in a 2–0 win over Quilmes on 1 October. Five appearances after, he
received the first red card of his career against Instituto. Dal Casón
left his Gimnasia y Esgrima loan in July 2018. Later that year, Dal
Casón moved to Italy to join Massese of Serie D. One appearance followed
on 12 December versus Ghivizzano.

January 2019 saw Dal Casón sign for San Telmo in Primera B
Metropolitana.

International
=============

-   *Dal Casón played once for the Argentina U17s at the 2009 FIFA U-17
    World Cup.*

Dal Casón played once for the Argentina U17s at the 2009 FIFA U-17 World
Cup. He played the final thirty minutes as a substitute for Matías Sosa
in a Group A game against hosts Nigeria.

Career statistics
=================

-   *As of 25 January 2019.*

As of 25 January 2019.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Guido Dal Casón at Soccerway*

Guido Dal Casón at Soccerway
