**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hygrocybe\_coccinea\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Hygrocybe coccinea
==================

-   *Hygrocybe coccinea, sometimes called the scarlet hood, scarlet
    waxcap or righteous red waxy cap, is a colourful member of the
    mushroom genus Hygrocybe.*

Hygrocybe coccinea, sometimes called the scarlet hood, scarlet waxcap or
righteous red waxy cap, is a colourful member of the mushroom genus
Hygrocybe. These waxcaps are found across the Northern Hemisphere from
China and Japan to Europe and North America. The small bright red
mushroom is a familiar sight in unimproved grasslands in Europe in late
summer and autumn, and woodlands in North America in winter.

Taxonomy
========

-   *The specific epithet coccinea is Latin for "scarlet".*

The scarlet hood was first described as Agaricus coccineus by German
mycologist Jacob Christian Schäffer in 1774, before being transferred to
the genus Hygrophorus by Elias Magnus Fries in 1838, and finally
Hygrocybe by Paul Kummer in 1871. The specific epithet coccinea is Latin
for "scarlet".

Description
===========

-   *The adnate gills are thick and widely spaced, yellow red in
    colour.*

-   *The ringless stipe is up 2–5 cm (¾-2 in) high and 0.3–1 cm (⅛-⅓ in)
    wide, red with a yellowish base.*

-   *A small waxcap with an initially bell-shaped, and later flattening,
    cap 2–5 cm (¾–2 in) across, scarlet in colour and slimy in texture.*

A small waxcap with an initially bell-shaped, and later flattening, cap
2–5 cm (¾–2 in) across, scarlet in colour and slimy in texture. The
adnate gills are thick and widely spaced, yellow red in colour. The
spore print is white. The ringless stipe is up 2–5 cm (¾-2 in) high and
0.3–1 cm (⅛-⅓ in) wide, red with a yellowish base. The flesh is
yellowish-red and the smell and taste faint. The oval spores measure
7–9.5 x 4–5 μm.

Distribution and habitat
========================

-   *Hygrocybe coccinea has a wide distribution in unimproved grasslands
    across Europe from August to October.*

Hygrocybe coccinea has a wide distribution in unimproved grasslands
across Europe from August to October. In Britain, like all Hygrocybes,
it has its best seasons in frost-free late autumn months, and in western
North America it may be found under redwoods or in mixed woodland in
winter. It has been recorded growing under Rhododendron and oak
(Quercus) in Sagarmatha National Park in Nepal, and also occurs in
India, China and Japan.

Specimens initially identified as H. coccinea in Australia have been
reclassified as H. miniata or H. kandora.

Edibility
=========

-   *The scarlet hood is edible, but of fairly little interest.*

The scarlet hood is edible, but of fairly little interest.

See also
========

-   *List of Hygrocybe species*

List of Hygrocybe species

References
==========
