**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jim\_Fox\_%28basketball%2C\_born\_1943%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Jim Fox (basketball, born 1943)
===============================

-   *James L. Fox (born April 7, 1943) is an American former
    professional basketball player.*

James L. Fox (born April 7, 1943) is an American former professional
basketball player.

College career
==============

-   *He averaged 17.8 points and 13.6 rebounds per game.*

Fox was born in Atlanta and attended Gordon High School in Barnesville,
Georgia. A 6'10" center, Fox played in junior college before enrolling
his junior year at the University of South Carolina, playing in 13 games
his junior season. He burst onto the scene his senior year, 1964–65,
leading the Gamecocks in both scoring and rebounding. He averaged 17.8
points and 13.6 rebounds per game.

Professional career
===================

-   *For the season, he averaged 3.9 points and 3.4 rebounds per game.*

-   *In his final NBA season, he averaged 6.5 points and 4.6 rebounds
    per game.*

-   *For the season, in 81 games, he averaged 11.5 points and 8.8
    rebounds per game.*

-   *The 1974–75 season was his third full season with Seattle as Fox
    averaged 9.0 points and 6.5 rebounds per game.*

He was drafted in the eighth round of the 1965 NBA draft by the
Cincinnati Royals, but he elected to play professionally in Europe for
two seasons.

Fox joined the NBA's Royals for the 1967–68 season. In 31 games for the
Royals, he averaged 3.2 points and 3.1 rebounds in eight minutes per
game. Then, on February 1, 1968, he was part of a big trade which sent
him and Happy Hairston to the Detroit Pistons for Tom Van Arsdale and
John Tresvant. His playing time increased to over 15 minutes per game in
24 games for the Pistons, and he averaged 4.1 points and 5.6 rebounds
per game.

The following season, 1968–69, Fox again was part of a midseason trade.
In 25 games for the Pistons, he averaged 5.0 points and 5.6 rebounds per
game before being traded on December 17, 1968, along with a third-round
draft pick to the\
Phoenix Suns for McCoy McLemore. He found success with the Suns—he
became a starter, averaging over 38 minutes per game and career-high
13.8 points and 13.3 rebounds along with 2.8 assists per game.

In 1969–70, he played the entire season for the Suns. Averaging 25
minutes per game in 81 games, he averaged 12.9 points and 7.0 rebounds
per game with a career-best .524 field goal percentage.

Just after the completion of the 1969–70 season, on April 23, 1970, Fox
was again traded, this time along with a second-round draft pick to the
Chicago Bulls for Clem Haskins. For the 1970–21 season with the Bulls,
Fox played in all 82 games, averaging 9.7 points, 7.3 rebounds and 2.4
assists per game.

In 1971–72, Fox played in 10 games for the Bulls before being traded
again, this time along with a second-round draft pick back to the
Cincinnati Royals for Norm Van Lier and a third-round pick. For the
season, in 81 games, he averaged 11.5 points and 8.8 rebounds per game.

On October 9, 1972, Fox was on the move yet again. The Kansas City-Omaha
Kings (formerly the Cincinnati Royals) traded him along with Dick Gibbs
to the Seattle SuperSonics for a second-round pick. In the 1972–73
season, he averaged 11.4 points and a career second-best 11.2 rebounds
per game.

In 1973–74 he had another fine season with the Sonics, averaging 11.3
points and 9.2 rebounds along with a career-best 2.9 assists per game.
He still holds the SuperSonics single-game record for rebounds with 30,
while adding 25 points and nine assists, which he collected in a win
against the Los Angeles Lakers on December 26, 1973.

The 1974–75 season was his third full season with Seattle as Fox
averaged 9.0 points and 6.5 rebounds per game.

On October 22, 1975, Fox was traded to the Milwaukee Bucks for a
second-round draft pick. For the season, he averaged 3.9 points and 3.4
rebounds per game.

On October 20, 1976, the Bucks waived Fox, and a week later he signed
with the New York Nets. In his final NBA season, he averaged 6.5 points
and 4.6 rebounds per game.

Fox averaged 9.3 points and 7.4 rebounds in his 10-year NBA career.

Personal life
=============

-   *After retiring from his 10-year NBA career, in 1978 Fox founded
    Sport Court of Arizona, which specializes in game court
    construction, outdoor recreation, performance sports products, and
    surfacing.*

-   *In 2005, Fox was inducted into the South Carolina Athletic Hall of
    Fame.*

-   *Fox has taken up watercolors in his retirement.*

After retiring from his 10-year NBA career, in 1978 Fox founded Sport
Court of Arizona, which specializes in game court construction, outdoor
recreation, performance sports products, and surfacing. Sport Court of
Arizona serves residential communities and commercial properties in
Scottsdale, Tucson, Phoenix and their surrounding areas.

In 2005, Fox was inducted into the South Carolina Athletic Hall of Fame.

His two sons, Mike and Jim Jr., who grew up on Sport Court products,
have taken over the business since Jim Sr. has retired.

Fox has taken up watercolors in his retirement. He is a signature member
of the Arizona Watercolor Association and the National Watercolor
Society.

In 2018, Jim became a published illustrator with the debut of Babies
Nurse / Asi se alimentan los bebes (.mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}ISBN 978-1-930775-73-2).

He resides in Phoenix with his wife, Mary.

See also
========

-   *List of National Basketball Association players with most rebounds
    in a game*

List of National Basketball Association players with most rebounds in a
game

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Jim Fox at Basketball-Reference.com*

Jim Fox at Basketball-Reference.com

South Carolina Athletic Hall of Fame 2005 Inductees
