**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julie\_Christensen\_%28politician%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Julie Christensen (politician)
==============================

-   *Julienne "Julie" Christensen is an American politician, who served
    on the San Francisco Board of Supervisors from January 2015 to
    December 2015, representing District 3.*

Julienne "Julie" Christensen is an American politician, who served on
the San Francisco Board of Supervisors from January 2015 to December
2015, representing District 3.

Biography
=========

-   *After studying sculpture, painting, and pre-law, Christensen worked
    for design firm Skidmore, Owings & Merrill in San Francisco before
    starting her own firm, Surface Work, in 1981.*

After studying sculpture, painting, and pre-law, Christensen worked for
design firm Skidmore, Owings & Merrill in San Francisco before starting
her own firm, Surface Work, in 1981. Among her designs is the color of
the KitchenAid candy apple red mixer.

Political career
================

-   *She has also served on the Advisory Board for the San Francisco
    Planning and Urban Research Association and is an active proponent
    of extending San Francisco's Central Subway to North Beach.*

-   *In January 2015, Christensen was appointed by San Francisco Mayor
    Ed Lee to fill the District 3 supervisorial vacancy left by former
    Board of Supervisors President David Chiu upon his election to the
    California State Assembly.*

In January 2015, Christensen was appointed by San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee
to fill the District 3 supervisorial vacancy left by former Board of
Supervisors President David Chiu upon his election to the California
State Assembly. In the closely fought supervisorial election in December
2015, she was defeated by Aaron Peskin, who had previously held the seat
from 2001 until 2009. During the election campaign, Julie Christensen
cited the physics concept “wormhole”—a connection between two different
space-times—to describe the Stockton Street Tunnel connecting Union
Square and Chinatown, Peskin's ally Rose Pak distorted the word
“wormhole” to imply that Chinatown is a hole of worms, which
successfully triggered the anger of some Chinatown residents. That
negative press controlled by Rose Pak in Chinatown created an
opportunity for Peskin to pick up much-needed votes in the Chinese
community when he ran against Christensen.

She has also served on the Advisory Board for the San Francisco Planning
and Urban Research Association and is an active proponent of extending
San Francisco's Central Subway to North Beach.

Christensen currently serves as the executive director of the Dogpatch
and Northwest Potrero Hill Green Benefit District.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Julie Christensen's official Board of Supervisors page*

Julie Christensen's official Board of Supervisors page
