**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kalam%20SAT\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.090475721784777in"}\
*Kalam SAT*

Kalam SAT
=========

-   *Kalam SAT is a Femto Satellite.*

-   *Kalam SAT was launched by NASA along with several other experiments
    on Terrier Orion sounding rocket on 22 June 2017 from Wallops Island
    flight facility in Virginia.*

-   *This was the first time that a space probe made by an Indian
    student, was launched by NASA.*

-   *As selected student competitors, the team won an opportunity to
    design experiments to be launched into space on a NASA rocket.*

Kalam SAT is a Femto Satellite. It is named after former Indian
president Dr. A. P. J. Abdul Kalam and was built by an Indian High
school student team. The high school team participated in Cubes in
Space, a STEM-based education program by Idoodle Learning.Inc and NASA.
As selected student competitors, the team won an opportunity to design
experiments to be launched into space on a NASA rocket. Kalam SAT was
launched by NASA along with several other experiments on Terrier Orion
sounding rocket on 22 June 2017 from Wallops Island flight facility in
Virginia.

The weight of the probe is 64 grams and it is fitted in a 3.8
centimeters cube. The probe is composed of 3-D printed reinforced carbon
fiber polymer.\
The probe was launched by a sub-orbital spaceflight. The expected time
span of the mission (post flight) is 240 minutes. The tiny probe will be
operated only for less than 12 minutes to demonstrate the performance of
3-D printed carbon fiber in a micro-gravity environment of space.

The probe was built by seven Students from Space Kidz India, a Research
Organization based in Chennai, as a part of a ‘Cubes in Space’
competition. This contest was jointly organized by NASA and ‘I Doodle
Learning’, which is a global education company. This was the first time
that a space probe made by an Indian student, was launched by
NASA.\[citation needed\]

Records
=======

-   *Kalam SAT is designated in the pages of Asia Book of Records, India
    Book of Records and Assist World Records, as holding the record
    title of "World's lightest and smallest satellite".*

Kalam SAT is designated in the pages of Asia Book of Records, India Book
of Records and Assist World Records, as holding the record title of
"World's lightest and smallest satellite".

See also
========

-   *Small Satellite Research Laboratory*

CanSat

List of CubeSats

Small Satellite Research Laboratory

Planet Labs

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *idoodlelearning.com*

-   *Cubes in Space™ program*

Cubes in Space™ program

idoodlelearning.com
