**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katy%20Tur\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Katy Tur
========

-   *Katharine Bear Tur (born October 26, 1983) is an American author
    and broadcast journalist working as a correspondent for NBC News.*

-   *Tur is an anchor for MSNBC Live and has reported for the NBC news
    platforms Early Today, Today, NBC Nightly News, Meet the Press,
    WNBC-TV, MSNBC, and The Weather Channel.*

Katharine Bear Tur (born October 26, 1983) is an American author and
broadcast journalist working as a correspondent for NBC News. Tur is an
anchor for MSNBC Live and has reported for the NBC news platforms Early
Today, Today, NBC Nightly News, Meet the Press, WNBC-TV, MSNBC, and The
Weather Channel.

Early life
==========

-   *Tur is the daughter of journalists Zoey Tur and Marika Gerrard.*

Tur is the daughter of journalists Zoey Tur and Marika Gerrard. She
graduated from Brentwood School (2001), and from the University of
California, Santa Barbara (2005) with a Bachelor of Arts in philosophy.
She is of Jewish descent on Zoey's side.

Career
======

-   *Later on, Tur worked as a storm chaser for The Weather Channel on
    the network's VORTEX2 team.*

-   *Tur reported for KTLA, HD News/Cablevision, News 12 Brooklyn,
    WPIX-TV, and Fox 5 New York.*

Tur reported for KTLA, HD News/Cablevision, News 12 Brooklyn, WPIX-TV,
and Fox 5 New York. Later on, Tur worked as a storm chaser for The
Weather Channel on the network's VORTEX2 team.

NBC News
========

-   *In 2009, Tur joined NBC's local station in New York City, WNBC-TV,
    and then rose to the flagship NBC News at the national network
    level.*

In 2009, Tur joined NBC's local station in New York City, WNBC-TV, and
then rose to the flagship NBC News at the national network level. That
year she was awarded APâ€™s Best Spot News Award for coverage of the March
2008 crane collapse on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. While at NBC
News, she covered the death of Cory Monteith, a motorcycle attack on an
SUV, and the search for Malaysia Airlines Flight 370.

Covering the Trump campaign
===========================

-   *Tur was the network's embedded reporter for the Donald Trump
    presidential campaign.*

-   *Tur reflected on covering the Trump campaign and his treatment of
    her at campaign rallies in an article for Marie Claire.*

-   *On several occasions during his campaign rallies, Trump singled out
    Tur in his criticism of the press.*

Tur was the network's embedded reporter for the Donald Trump
presidential campaign. As a reporter for NBC, Tur was assigned the task
of informing the Trump campaign about the Access Hollywood tape
featuring Trump's conversation with Billy Bush about women, that NBC
possessed.

On several occasions during his campaign rallies, Trump singled out Tur
in his criticism of the press. At an event in Florida, Tur was booed by
Trump supporters and, according to other journalists, was subjected to
verbal harassment. According to Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway,
"\[Trump\] didn't mean it in any malicious way", and he did not want
anyone to attack or harass her.

In 2017, Tur received the Walter Cronkite Award for Excellence in
Journalism.

Tur reflected on covering the Trump campaign and his treatment of her at
campaign rallies in an article for Marie Claire. In September 2017, Tur
published a book, Unbelievable: My Front-Row Seat to the Craziest
Campaign in American History, recounting her experience in covering the
2016 presidential campaign of Donald Trump.

Personal life
=============

-   *Tur announced on December 13, 2018, that she was pregnant.*

-   *Tur had a falling out with her transgender father, Zoey Tur, and
    the two did not speak for several years.*

-   *Tur married Tony Dokoupil, a correspondent for CBS News, on October
    27, 2017, in Utah.*

-   *On April 13, 2019, Tur gave birth to Theodore Dokoupil.*

-   *Tur is fluent in Spanish.*

From 2006 to 2009, she dated then-MSNBC political commentator and
sportscaster Keith Olbermann. Tur married Tony Dokoupil, a correspondent
for CBS News, on October 27, 2017, in Utah.

Tur announced on December 13, 2018, that she was pregnant. On April 13,
2019, Tur gave birth to Theodore Dokoupil.

Tur had a falling out with her transgender father, Zoey Tur, and the two
did not speak for several years.

Tur is a fan of the jam band Phish, often making references to the band
and incorporating their lyrics into her reporting.

Tur is fluent in Spanish.

See also
========

-   *New Yorkers in journalism*

New Yorkers in journalism

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *'Come here, Katy': how Donald Trump turned me into a target*

-   *Katy Tur on Twitter*

-   *Katy Tur on IMDb*

Katy Tur on Twitter

Katy Tur on IMDb

'Come here, Katy': how Donald Trump turned me into a target
