**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katzenbach%20v.%20McClung\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Katzenbach v. McClung
=====================

-   *Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964), is a United States
    Supreme Court case in which the Court unanimously held that Congress
    acted within its power under the Commerce Clause of the United
    States Constitution in forbidding racial discrimination in
    restaurants as this was a burden to interstate commerce.*

Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964), is a United States Supreme
Court case in which the Court unanimously held that Congress acted
within its power under the Commerce Clause of the United States
Constitution in forbidding racial discrimination in restaurants as this
was a burden to interstate commerce.

Background
==========

-   *On the same day, the Supreme Court heard challenges to Title II
    from a motel owner and from Ollie McClung.*

-   *Ollie McClung had won an initial round in the United States
    District Court for the Northern District of Alabama when he received
    an injunction preventing the Government from enforcing Title II
    against his restaurant.*

-   *Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawing segregation
    in American schools and public places.*

Ollie McClung's restaurant, Ollie's Barbecue, was a family-owned
restaurant that operated in Birmingham, Alabama, and seated 220
customers. It was located on a state highway and was 11 blocks from an
interstate highway. In a typical year, approximately half of the food it
purchased from a local supplier originated out-of-state. It catered to
local families and white-collar workers and provided take-out service to
African American customers.

Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 outlawing segregation in
American schools and public places. One section of the act, Title II,
was specifically intended to grant African-Americans full access to
public facilities such as hotels, restaurants, and public recreation
areas. On the same day, the Supreme Court heard challenges to Title II
from a motel owner and from Ollie McClung. Both claimed that the federal
government had no right to impose any regulations on small, private
businesses. Both ultimately lost. Ollie McClung had won an initial round
in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Alabama
when he received an injunction preventing the Government from enforcing
Title II against his restaurant. But then Attorney General Nicholas
Katzenbach appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court.

Decision
========

-   *In Section 5 of the decision, the Court affirmed previous decisions
    that Congress has the authority to regulate local intrastate
    activities if the activities significantly affect interstate
    commerce in the aggregate, citing United States v. Wrightwood Dairy
    Co., Wickard v. Filburn, Gibbons v. Ogden, and United States v.
    Darby.*

-   *The court ruled unanimously that the Civil Rights Act is
    constitutional and that it was properly applied against Ollie's
    Barbecue.*

McClung argued that the Civil Rights Act was unconstitutional, at least
as applied to a small, private business such as his. McClung further
argued that the amount of food purchased by Ollie's that actually
crossed state lines (about half of the food at Ollie's) was so minuscule
that Ollie's effectively had no effect on interstate commerce (although
McClung admitted that a significant amount of Ollie's business was to
interstate travelers). Consequently, McClung argued that Congress had no
power to regulate Ollie's Barbecue under the Commerce Clause.

The court ruled unanimously that the Civil Rights Act is constitutional
and that it was properly applied against Ollie's Barbecue.

Justice Clark wrote the majority opinion, with concurrences by Justices
Black, Douglas, and Goldberg. In section 2 of the opinion, the Court
agreed with McClung that Ollie's itself had virtually no effect on
interstate commerce. In section 4 of the opinion, the Court held that
racial discrimination in restaurants had a significant impact on
interstate commerce and so Congress has the power to regulate this
conduct under the Commerce Clause. The Court's conclusion was based on
extensive Congressional hearings on the issue. The Court cited testimony
that African Americans spent significantly less time in areas with
racially segregated restaurants and that segregation imposed an
artificial restriction on the flow of merchandise by discouraging
African Americans from making purchases in segregated establishments.
The Court gave the greatest weight to evidence that segregation in
restaurants had a "direct and highly restrictive effect upon interstate
travel by Negroes."

In Section 5 of the decision, the Court affirmed previous decisions that
Congress has the authority to regulate local intrastate activities if
the activities significantly affect interstate commerce in the
aggregate, citing United States v. Wrightwood Dairy Co., Wickard v.
Filburn, Gibbons v. Ogden, and United States v. Darby.

The appellees objected to Congress' approach in determining what affects
commerce, the court held, “Where we find that the legislators, in light
of the facts and testimony before them, have a rational basis for
finding a chosen regulatory scheme necessary to the protection of
commerce, our investigation is at an end.”

Subsequent developments
=======================

-   *After decades in operation, Ollie's Barbecue moved to the suburb of
    Pelham in 1999 and closed in 2001.*

After decades in operation, Ollie's Barbecue moved to the suburb of
Pelham in 1999 and closed in 2001.

See also
========

-   *Civil Rights Movement*

-   *Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States*

Heart of Atlanta Motel v. United States

Civil Rights Movement

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Text of Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964) is available
    from:  Cornell  CourtListener  Findlaw  Google Scholar  Justia  Oyez
    (oral argument audio)*

Text of Katzenbach v. McClung, 379 U.S. 294 (1964) is available from:
 Cornell  CourtListener  Findlaw  Google Scholar  Justia  Oyez (oral
argument audio) 
