**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List%20of%20United%20States%20Senators%20from%20Arizona\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

List of United States Senators from Arizona
===========================================

-   *Senators from Arizona belong to Class 1 and Class 3 and are
    popularly elected for a six-year term beginning January 3.*

Arizona was admitted to the Union on February 14, 1912. U.S. Senators
from Arizona belong to Class 1 and Class 3 and are popularly elected for
a six-year term beginning January 3. Elections are held the first
Tuesday after November 1. The state's current U.S. Senators are Democrat
Kyrsten Sinema and Republican Martha McSally, both serving since 2019,
making it one of nine states to have a split United States Senate
delegation.

List of Senators
================

Living former U.S. Senators from Arizona
========================================

-   *As of January 2019\[update\], there are three living former U.S.*

-   *Senators from Arizona.*

As of January 2019\[update\], there are three living former U.S.
Senators from Arizona. The most recent to die was John McCain (served
1987–2018), who died in office on August 25, 2018 and is also the most
recently serving to die.

References
==========

-   *"Senate Class III – History".*

-   *"Senate Class I – History".*

"Senate Class I – History". Our Campaigns. Retrieved October 2,
2013..mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

"Senate Class III – History". Our Campaigns. Retrieved October 2, 2013.

See also
========

-   *United States congressional delegations from Arizona*

-   *Elections in Arizona*

-   *List of United States Representatives from Arizona*

List of United States Representatives from Arizona

United States congressional delegations from Arizona

Elections in Arizona
