**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List%20of%20Gemini%20astronauts\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="5.463576115485564in"}\
*Gemini VI-A (foreground) and Gemini VII make the first rendezvous in
orbit between two manned spacecraft*

List of Gemini astronauts
=========================

-   *The Gemini astronauts were pilots who flew in Project Gemini,
    NASA's second human spaceflight program, between projects Mercury
    and Apollo.*

-   *Importantly, most individuals who flew as Gemini astronauts
    returned to space as key personnel in the Apollo program, bringing
    with them their first-hand experience of the operations carried out
    during Gemini.*

The Gemini astronauts were pilots who flew in Project Gemini, NASA's
second human spaceflight program, between projects Mercury and Apollo.
Carrying two astronauts at a time, a senior Command Pilot and a junior
Pilot, the Gemini spacecraft was used for ten crewed missions. Sixteen
astronauts flew on these missions, with four flying twice.

Gemini was the second phase in the United States space program's larger
goal of "landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the
Earth" before the end of the 1960s, as proposed by president John F.
Kennedy. As an intermediary step, Gemini afforded its astronauts the
opportunity to gain critical spaceflight experience, performing tasks
required in the later Apollo program which fulfilled this objective.
Such tasks included rendezvous or station-keeping with other craft,
docking, habitation in space over the course of several days, and flying
spacecraft with more than one crew member. Importantly, most individuals
who flew as Gemini astronauts returned to space as key personnel in the
Apollo program, bringing with them their first-hand experience of the
operations carried out during Gemini. Among the Gemini astronauts, six
later walked on the Moon, another five flew to the Moon without landing,
and two participated in Low Earth orbit Apollo missions. Gus Grissom and
Ed White were killed in the Apollo 1 disaster, and former Mercury
astronaut Gordon Cooper did not perform any further spaceflights.

Astronaut participation in Project Gemini was also a strong predictor
for future achievement during the Apollo Program:

Every Apollo mission commander, including Gus Grissom and with the
exception of Alan Shepard, was a Gemini veteran.

All three crew members of Apollo 11, the first lunar landing-Neil
Armstrong, Michael Collins and Buzz Aldrin-were Gemini veterans.

All three of the men who flew to the Moon twice-Jim Lovell, John Young
and Gene Cernan-were Gemini veterans.

With the exception of Elliot See, every member of NASA's second
Astronaut Group—the class of nine men selected following the Mercury
Seven—flew as a Gemini astronaut.

Key
===

Notes
=====

References
==========
