**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lola%20Hendricks\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Lola Hendricks
==============

-   *Lola Mae Haynes Hendricks (née Haynes) (born December 1932) was
    corresponding secretary for Fred Shuttlesworth's Alabama Christian
    Movement for Human Rights from 1956 to 1963.*

-   *She assisted Wyatt Walker in planning the early portions of the
    Southern Christian Leadership Conference's involvement in the 1963
    Birmingham Campaign during the Civil Rights Movement.*

Lola Mae Haynes Hendricks (née Haynes) (born December 1932) was
corresponding secretary for Fred Shuttlesworth's Alabama Christian
Movement for Human Rights from 1956 to 1963. She assisted Wyatt Walker
in planning the early portions of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference's involvement in the 1963 Birmingham Campaign during the
Civil Rights Movement.

Early life
==========

-   *Lola Mae Haynes went to school in Birmingham at Cameron Elementary
    School, graduated, and then went to Ullman High School for two
    years.*

-   *Lola Mae Haynes was born in Birmingham, Alabama on 4th Avenue and
    15th Street South on the south side of Birmingham.*

-   *In February 1953, Lola Mae Haynes married Joseph Hendricks.*

On December 19th, 1932 Lola Mae Haynes, the first of two daughters, was
born to Buford and Addie Hanes. Lola Mae Haynes was born in Birmingham,
Alabama on 4th Avenue and 15th Street South on the south side of
Birmingham. Her father was employed as a coal-truck driver from
LaGrange, Georgia and her mother, from Chambers County, Alabama, worked
as a domestic cook. Lola Mae Haynes went to school in Birmingham at
Cameron Elementary School, graduated, and then went to Ullman High
School for two years. In 1949, Haynes attended Parker High School for
two years and graduated in January of '51. After graduating from Parker
High School, she began working as an elevator operator at Hillman
Hospital, now called University Hospital. Lola Mae Haynes saved her
money from the hospital for a year, until she was able to enroll herself
in beauty school in 1952 where she attended the Ruth Porter's School of
Beauty Culture.

In February 1953, Lola Mae Haynes married Joseph Hendricks. Lola then
went on to study for two years at the Booker T. Washington Business
College. After graduating from Booker T. Washington Business College,
Lola began employment in the insurance industry at Alexander & Company.
The company, owned by John J. Drew and his wife Deanie, had employed
Lola Mae Haynes Hendricks as a clerk-typist and an insurance writer. In
1963, Haynes began working for the Federal Government under the Social
Security Administration, where she became one of the first African
Americans to integrate amongst the whites into the workforce. Hendricks
worked in files for about two years, and then was promoted to Clerk
Typing and again, to Award Typing.

Civil Rights Movement
=====================

-   *The children's book The Youngest Marcher: The Story of Audrey Faye
    Hendricks, A Young Civil Rights Activist (2017) by Cynthia Levinson,
    is about that.*

-   *Hendricks and her husband were the named parties in ACMHR-backed
    lawsuits to force integration of Birmingham city parks and to
    desegregate the Birmingham Public Library.*

The Hendrickses were members of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). When the group was outlawed by
the State of Alabama in 1956 she became one of the early members of the
Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, joining at a mass meeting
at Nelson Smith's New Pilgrim Baptist Church where she was a member. The
ACMHR, led by Shuttlesworth, organized local boycotts and demonstrations
as well as coordinating legal challenges to Birmingham's segregation
laws in the 1950s and 1960s. Hendricks and her husband were the named
parties in ACMHR-backed lawsuits to force integration of Birmingham city
parks and to desegregate the Birmingham Public Library. She also served
as the organization's correspondence secretary, working from
Shuttleworth's office at Bethel Baptist Church from 1956 until the
culmination of the Birmingham Campaign. In December 1962 she traveled to
New England as a field director for the Southern Conference Education
Fund, raising awareness among Northerners about the realities of
Southern segregation and soliciting donations of Christmas toys for
movement members boycotting Birmingham's department stores.

In the Spring of 1963, Hendricks coordinated the practical office
requirements and cultivated local contacts for the combined efforts of
the ACMHR and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), which
Shuttlesworth had co-founded and which was chaired by Martin Luther
King, Jr.. She worked directly with the SCLC's Wyatt Walker during the
campaign, helping organize support and logistics for marches and
department store boycotts.

It was Hendricks who applied directly to Public Safety Commissioner
Eugene "Bull" Connor for a parade permit for the first day of marches
and was told "You will not get a permit in Birmingham, Alabama to
picket. I'll picket you over to the jail." At Walker's urging she did
not actively demonstrate and risk jailing, protecting her
behind-the-scenes importance to the movement. Hendricks' nine-year-old
daughter, Audrey Faye Hendricks (1952–2009), however, was the only child
in her class to participate in the May 2, 1963 "Children's Crusade" that
brought national attention to Connor's brutal tactics against
demonstrators. She spent five nights in jail as minders got word out to
her parents that she was safe. She was the youngest known child to be
arrested for that protest. The children's book The Youngest Marcher: The
Story of Audrey Faye Hendricks, A Young Civil Rights Activist (2017) by
Cynthia Levinson, is about that. That book also contains a recipe for
Lola Hendricks’s "Hot Rolls Baptized in Butter".

Later life
==========

-   *She continued to volunteer at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
    and in the mid 1990s she assisted the Birmingham Historical Society
    in researching movement churches and landmarks for National Register
    of Historic Places status.*

-   *The children's book The Youngest Marcher: The Story of Audrey Faye
    Hendricks, A Young Civil Rights Activist (2017) by Cynthia Levinson,
    is about that.*

Hendricks left her insurance company job in 1963 to join the newly
integrated Birmingham office of the Social Security Administration. She
was hired originally as a filer, but was promoted to unit clerk before
moving to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission where she became a
supervisor. She left in 1983 to care for her mother. In 1988 she
rejoined the Social Security Administration where she worked until
reaching retirement. She continued to volunteer at the Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute and in the mid 1990s she assisted the Birmingham
Historical Society in researching movement churches and landmarks for
National Register of Historic Places status.

She has two sisters (one deceased), two daughters, Audrey Faye Hendricks
(1952–2009) and Jan Hendricks Fuller, and one grandson, Joel A. Fuller.
Audrey Faye Hendricks (1952–2009), at the age of nine, was the only
child in her class to participate in the May 2, 1963 "Children's
Crusade" that brought national attention to Eugene "Bull" Connor's
brutal tactics against demonstrators. She spent five nights in jail as
minders got word out to her parents that she was safe. She was the
youngest known child to be arrested for that protest. The children's
book The Youngest Marcher: The Story of Audrey Faye Hendricks, A Young
Civil Rights Activist (2017) by Cynthia Levinson, is about that. That
book also contains a recipe for Lola Hendricks’s "Hot Rolls Baptized in
Butter".

Quotation
=========

-   *-Mrs. Lola H. Hendricks; Birmingham Civil Rights Institute Oral
    History Project, January 19, 1995*

"I never had any fear." -Mrs. Lola H. Hendricks; Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute Oral History Project, January 19, 1995

See also
========

-   *List of civil rights leaders*

List of civil rights leaders

References
==========
