**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Looking%20Backward\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Looking Backward
================

-   *In the United States alone, over 162 "Bellamy Clubs" sprang up to
    discuss and propagate the book's ideas.*

-   *Looking Backward: 2000–1887 is a utopian science fiction novel by
    Edward Bellamy, a journalist and writer from Chicopee Falls,
    Massachusetts; it was first published in 1888.*

-   *The novel also inspired several utopian communities.*

Looking Backward: 2000–1887 is a utopian science fiction novel by Edward
Bellamy, a journalist and writer from Chicopee Falls, Massachusetts; it
was first published in 1888.

It was the third largest bestseller of its time, after Uncle Tom's Cabin
and Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ. It influenced a large number of
intellectuals, and appears by title in many socialist writings of the
day. "It is one of the few books ever published that created almost
immediately on its appearance a political mass movement".

In the United States alone, over 162 "Bellamy Clubs" sprang up to
discuss and propagate the book's ideas. Owing to its commitment to the
nationalization of private property and the desire to avoid use of the
term "socialism", this political movement came to be known as
Nationalism — not to be confused with the political concept of
nationalism. The novel also inspired several utopian communities.

Publication history
===================

-   *In its second release, Bellamy's futuristic novel met with enormous
    popular success, with more than 400,000 copies sold in the United
    States alone by the time Bellamy's follow-up novel, Equality, was
    published in 1897.*

-   *Bellamy's book, gradually planned throughout the 1880s, was
    completed in 1887 and taken to Boston publisher Benjamin Ticknor,
    who published a first edition of the novel in January 1888.*

The decades of the 1870s and the 1880s were marked by economic and
social turmoil, including the Long Depression of 1873–1879, a series of
recessions during the 1880s, the rise of organized labor and strikes,
and the 1886 Haymarket affair and its controversial aftermath. Moreover,
American capitalism's tendency towards concentration into ever larger
and less competitive forms—monopolies, oligopolies, and trusts—began to
make itself evident, while emigration from Europe expanded the labor
pool and caused wages to stagnate. The time was ripe for new ideas about
economic development which might ameliorate the current social disorder.

Edward Bellamy (1850–1898), a relatively unknown New England-born
novelist with a history of concern with social issues, began to conceive
of writing an impactful work of visionary fiction shaping the outlines
of a utopian future, in which production and society were ordered for
the smooth production and distribution of commodities to a regimented
labor force. In this he was not alone — between 1860 and 1887, no fewer
than 11 such works of fiction were produced in the United States by
various authors dealing fundamentally with the questions of economic and
social organization.

Bellamy's book, gradually planned throughout the 1880s, was completed in
1887 and taken to Boston publisher Benjamin Ticknor, who published a
first edition of the novel in January 1888. Initial sales of the book
were modest and uninspiring, but the book did find a readership in the
Boston area, including enthusiastic reviews by future Bellamyites Cyrus
Field Willard of the Boston Globe and Sylvester Baxter of the Boston
Herald.

Shortly after publication, Ticknor's publishing enterprise, Ticknor and
Company, was purchased by the larger Boston publisher, Houghton, Mifflin
& Co., and new publishing plates were created for the book. Certain
"slight emendations" were made to the text by Bellamy for this second
edition, released by Houghton Mifflin in September 1889.

In its second release, Bellamy's futuristic novel met with enormous
popular success, with more than 400,000 copies sold in the United States
alone by the time Bellamy's follow-up novel, Equality, was published in
1897. Sales topped 532,000 in the US by the middle of 1939. The book
gained an extensive readership in Great Britain, as well, with more than
235,000 copies sold there between its first release in 1890 and 1935.

The first version of the novel published in China, heavily edited for
the tastes of Chinese readers, was titled Huitou kan jilüe (回頭看記略).
This text was later retitled Bainian Yi Jiao (百年一覺 ), or "A Sleep of
100 Years" and in 1891–1892 this version was serialized in Wanguo
gongbao; the organization Guangxuehui (廣學會; Society for Promoting
Education) published these pieces in a book format. This first
translation, the first piece of science fiction from a Western country
published in Qing dynasty China, was done in an abridged format by
Timothy Richard. The novel was again serialized in China in 1898, in
Zhongguo guanyin baihua bao (中國官音白話報); and in 1904, under the
title Huitou kan (Looking Backward), within Xiuxiang xiaoshuo (繡像小說;
Illustrated Fiction).

The book remains in print in multiple editions, with one publisher alone
having reissued the title in a printing of 100,000 copies in 1945.

Synopsis
========

-   *Bellamy also predicts both sermons and music being available in the
    home through cable "telephone" (already demonstrated but
    commercialized only in 1890 as Théâtrophone in France).*

-   *Although Bellamy's novel did not discuss technology or the economy
    in detail, commentators frequently compare Looking Backward with
    actual economic and technological developments.*

-   *The remainder of the book outlines Bellamy's thoughts about
    improving the future.*

Bellamy's novel tells the story of a hero figure named Julian West, a
young American, who towards the end of the 19th century, falls into a
deep, hypnosis-induced sleep and wakes up 113 years later. He finds
himself in the same location (Boston, Massachusetts), but in a totally
changed world: It is the year 2000, and while he was sleeping, the
United States has been transformed into a socialist utopia. The
remainder of the book outlines Bellamy's thoughts about improving the
future. The major themes include problems associated with capitalism, a
proposed socialist solution of a nationalization of all industry, and
the use of an "industrial army" to organize production and distribution,
as well as how to ensure free cultural production under such conditions.

The young man readily finds a guide, Doctor Leete, who shows him around
and explains all the advances of this new age, including drastically
reduced working hours for people performing menial jobs and almost
instantaneous, Internet-like delivery of goods. Everyone retires with
full benefits at age 45, and may eat in any of the public kitchens. The
productive capacity of the United States is nationally owned, and the
goods of society are equally distributed to its citizens. A considerable
portion of the book is dialogue between Leete and West wherein West
expresses his confusion about how the future society works and Leete
explains the answers using various methods, such as metaphors or direct
comparisons with 19th-century society.

Although Bellamy's novel did not discuss technology or the economy in
detail, commentators frequently compare Looking Backward with actual
economic and technological developments. For example, Julian West is
taken to a store which (with its descriptions of cutting out the
middleman to cut down on waste in a similar way to the consumers'
cooperatives of his own day based on the Rochdale Principles of 1844)
somewhat resembles a modern warehouse club like BJ's, Costco, or Sam's
Club. He additionally introduces a concept of "credit" cards in chapters
9, 10, 11, 13, 25, and 26, but these actually function like modern debit
cards. All citizens receive an equal amount of "credit". Those with more
difficult, specialized, dangerous, or unpleasant jobs work fewer hours
(in contrast to the real-world practice of paying them more for their
efforts of, presumably, the same hours). Bellamy also predicts both
sermons and music being available in the home through cable "telephone"
(already demonstrated but commercialized only in 1890 as Théâtrophone in
France).

Despite the "ethical" character of his socialism (though he was
initially reluctant to use the term "socialism"), Bellamy's ideas
somewhat reflect classical Marxism. In chapter 19, for example, he has
the new legal system explained. Most civil suits have ended in
socialism, while crime has become a medical issue. The idea of atavism,
then current, is employed to explain crimes not related to inequality
(which Bellamy thinks will vanish with socialism). Remaining criminals
are medically treated. One professional judge presides, appointing two
colleagues to state the prosecution and defense cases. If all do not
agree on the verdict, then it must be tried over. Chapters 15 and 16
have an explanation of how free, independent public art and news outlets
could be provided in a more libertarian socialist system. In one case,
Bellamy even writes, "the nation is the sole employer and capitalist".

Precursors
==========

-   *B. Shipley argued that Bellamy's novel was a repeat of Bebel's
    arguments, while literary critic R. L. Shurter went so far as to
    argue that "Looking Backward is actually a fictionalized version of
    The Co-operative Commonwealth and little more".*

-   *For example, in The True Author of Looking Backward (1890) J.*

Though Bellamy tended to stress the independence of his work, Looking
Backward shares relationships and resemblances with several earlier
works—most notably the anonymous The Great Romance (1881), John Macnie's
The Diothas (1883), Laurence Gronlund's The Co-operative Commonwealth
(1884), and August Bebel's Woman in the Past, Present, and Future
(1886). For example, in The True Author of Looking Backward (1890) J. B.
Shipley argued that Bellamy's novel was a repeat of Bebel's arguments,
while literary critic R. L. Shurter went so far as to argue that
"Looking Backward is actually a fictionalized version of The
Co-operative Commonwealth and little more". However, Bellamy's book also
bears resemblances to the early socialist theorists or 'utopian
socialists' Etienne Cabet, Charles Fourier, Robert Owen, and Henri
Saint-Simon, as well as to the 'Associationism' of Albert Brisbane whom
Bellamy had met in the 1870s.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="3.490667104111986in" height="5.5in"}\
*German Reclam edition 1919*

Reaction and sequels
====================

-   *Looking Backward and What I Saw (1890)*

-   *Bellamy, C.J.*

-   *Looking Within: The Misleading Tendencies of "Looking Backward"
    Made Manifest (1893)*

-   *Looking Further Forward: An Answer to "Looking Backward" by Edward
    Bellamy (1890)*

-   *Schindler, S. Young West: A Sequel to Edward Bellamy's Celebrated
    Novel "Looking Backward" (1894)*

-   *Looking Further Backward (1890)*

On publication, Looking Backward was praised by both the American
Federation of Labor and the Knights of Labor. Many members of the
Knights read Looking Backward and also joined Bellamy's Nationalist
clubs. Looking Backward was also praised by Daniel De Leon, Elizabeth
Gurley Flynn and Upton Sinclair.

In 1897, Bellamy wrote a sequel, Equality, dealing with women's rights,
education, and many other issues. Bellamy wrote the sequel to elaborate
and clarify many of the ideas merely touched upon in Looking Backward.

The success of Looking Backward provoked a spate of sequels, parodies,
satires, dystopian, and 'anti-utopian' responses. A partial list of
these follows.

Directly 'anti-Bellamy' responses:

Bachelder, J. A.D. 2050. Electrical Development at Atlantis (1890)

Harris, G. Inequality and Progress (1897) \[which assumes Bellamy
advocated an absolute equality of goods\]

Michaelis, R.C. Looking Further Forward: An Answer to "Looking Backward"
by Edward Bellamy (1890)

Morris, William, News from Nowhere (1890)

Roberts, J.W. Looking Within: The Misleading Tendencies of "Looking
Backward" Made Manifest (1893)

Sanders, G.A. Reality: or Law and order vs. Anarchy and Socialism, A
Reply to Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward and Equality (1898)

Satterlee, W.W. Looking Backward and What I Saw (1890)

Vinton, A.D. Looking Further Backward (1890)

West, J. \[pseud.\] My Afterdream (1900)

Wilbrant, C. Mr. East's Experiences in Mr. Bellamy's World (1891)

Direct and positive utopian responses / unofficial sequels:

Berwick, E. 'Farming in the Year 2000, A.D.', Overland Monthly (1890)

Bellamy, C.J. An Experiment in Marriage. A Romance (1889) \[Bellamy's
brother\]

Chavannes, A. In Brighter Climes, or Life in Socioland (1895) by A.
Chavannes

Chavannes, A. The Future Commonwealth (1892)

Claflin, S.F. Nationalism. Or a System of Organic Unity (189x)

'Crusoe, R.' Looking Upwards; or Nothing New (1892)

Emmens, S.H. The Sixteenth Amendment (1896)

Flower, B.O. Equality and Brotherhood (1897) \[A positive response to
Bellamy's Equality; see also 'The Latest Social Vision', Arena v.18,
pp. 517–34\]

Flower, B.O. The New Time (1894)

Fuller, A.M. A.D. 2000 (1890)

Geissler, L.A. Looking Beyond (1891)

Giles, F.S. The Industrial Army (1896)

Gillette, K.C., The Human Drift (1894)

Griffin, C.S. Nationalism (1889)

Gronlund, L. Our Destiny. The Influence of Nationalism on Morals and
Religion (1890) \[first syndicated The Nationalist, (March–September
1890)\]

Hayes, F.W. The Great Revolution of 1905: Or, The story of the Phalanx
(1893)

Hertzka, T. Freeland, a Social Anticipation (1890)

Howard, E. To-Morrow: A Peaceful Path to Real Reform (1898)

Howells, William Dean. A Traveler from Altruria (1894)

Howells, William Dean. Letters of an Altrurian Traveller (1904)

Howells, William Dean. Through the Eye of the Needle (1907)

McCowan, A. Philip Meyer’s Scheme (1892)

Moffat, W. White, G., and White J., What’s the World Coming To? (1893)

Porter, L.B. Speaking of Ellen (1890) \[not a utopia\]

Salisbury, H.B. 'The Birth of Freedom', The Nationalist (November 1890,
Mar–Apr 1891)

Schindler, S. 'Dr. Leete's Letter to Julian West', The Nationalist
(September 1890)

Schindler, S. Young West: A Sequel to Edward Bellamy's Celebrated Novel
"Looking Backward" (1894)

Stone, C.H. One of Berrian's Novels (1890)

Worley, F.U. Three Thousand Dollars a Year (1890) \[a gradualist
utopia\]

Hillman, H.W. Looking Forward (1906)

The result was a "battle of the books" that lasted through the rest of
the 19th century and into the 20th. The back-and-forth nature of the
debate is illustrated by the subtitle of Geissler's 1891 Looking Beyond,
which is "A Sequel to 'Looking Backward' by Edward Bellamy and an Answer
to 'Looking Forward' by Richard Michaelis".

The book was translated into Bulgarian in 1892. In 1900 Bellamy
personally approved a request by Bulgarian author Iliya Yovchev to make
an "adapted translation" based on the realities of Bulgarian social
order. The resulting work, titled The Present as Seen by Our Descendants
And a Glimpse at the Progress of the Future ("Настоящето, разгледано от
потомството ни и надничане в напредъка на бъдещето"), generally followed
the same plot. The events in Yovchev's version take place in an
environmentally friendly Sofia and describe the country's unique path of
adapting to the new social order. It is considered by local critics to
be the first Bulgarian utopian work.

The book also influenced activists in Britain. Scientist Alfred Russel
Wallace credited Looking Backward for his conversion to socialism.
Politician Alfred Salter cited Looking Backward as an influence on his
political thought.

William Morris's 1890 utopia News from Nowhere was partly written in
reaction to Bellamy's utopia, which Morris did not find congenial.

Beyond the purely literary sphere, Bellamy's descriptions of utopian
urban planning had a practical influence on Ebenezer Howard's founding
of the garden city movement in England, and on the design of the
Bradbury Building in Los Angeles.

During the Great Strikes of 1877, Eugene V. Debs opposed the strikes and
argued that there was no essential necessity for the conflict between
capital and labor. Debs was influenced by Bellamy's book to turn to a
more socialist direction. He soon helped to form the American Railway
Union. With supporters from the Knights of Labor and from the immediate
vicinity of Chicago, workers at the Pullman Palace Car Company went on
strike in June 1894. This came to be known as the Pullman Strike.

The book had a specific and intense reception in Wilhelminian Germany
including various parodies and sequels, from Eduard Loewenthal, Ernst
Müller and Philipp Wasserburg, Konrad Wilbrandt and Richard Michaelis.

In the 1930s, there was a revival of interest in Looking Backward.
Several groups were formed to promote the book's ideas. The largest was
Edward Bellamy Association of New York; its honorary members included
John Dewey, Heywood Broun and Roger N. Baldwin. Arthur Ernest Morgan,
chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority, also admired the book and
wrote the first biography of Bellamy.

Legacy and later responses
==========================

-   *The Knapps used Bellamy's Looking Backward as their heuristic model
    for understanding Progressive ideology as it shaped the Canal Zone.*

-   *Looking Backward was rewritten in 1974 by American socialist
    science fiction writer Mack Reynolds as Looking Backward from the
    Year 2000.*

-   *Looking Backward influenced the novel Future of a New China by
    Liang Qichao.*

Looking Backward influenced the novel Future of a New China by Liang
Qichao.

Looking Backward was rewritten in 1974 by American socialist science
fiction writer Mack Reynolds as Looking Backward from the Year 2000.
Matthew Kapell, a historian and anthropologist, examined this re-writing
in his essay, "Mack Reynolds' Avoidance of his own Eighteenth Brumaire:
A Note of Caution for Would-Be Utopians".

In 1984, Herbert Knapp and Mary Knapp's Red, White and Blue Paradise:
The American Canal Zone in Panama appeared. The book was in part a
memoir of their careers teaching at fabled Balboa High School, but also
a re-interpretation of the Canal Zone as a creature of
turn-of-the-century Progressivism, a workers' paradise. The Knapps used
Bellamy's Looking Backward as their heuristic model for understanding
Progressive ideology as it shaped the Canal Zone.

A one-act play, Bellamy's Musical Telephone, was written by Roger Lee
Hall and premiered at Emerson College in Boston in 1988 on the
centennial year of the novel's publication. It was released as a DVD
titled, "The Musical Telephone."

See also
========

-   *Equality Colony*

Equality Colony

Footnotes
=========

Further reading
===============

-   *Edward Bellamy, "How I Came to Write Looking Backward," The
    Nationalist (Boston), vol.*

-   *Edward Bellamy, Looking Backward, 2000-1887.*

Edward Bellamy, Looking Backward, 2000-1887. Boston: Ticknor and Co.,
1888. —First edition.

Edward Bellamy, Looking Backward, 2000-1887. Boston: Houghton, Mifflin &
Co., 1889. —Second edition.

Edward Bellamy, "How I Came to Write Looking Backward," The Nationalist
(Boston), vol. 1, no. 1 (May 1889), pp. 1–4.

External links
==============

-   *Looking Backward 2000-1887 at Faded Page (Canada)*

-   *Anna Simon (reader), Looking Backward, 2000-1887 audiobook,
    LibriVox.*

-   *The Musical Telephone – a play based on a chapter in Edward
    Bellamy's Looking Backward, 2000-1887*

Looking Backward 2000-1887 at Faded Page (Canada)

Full text on gutenberg.org

Anna Simon (reader), Looking Backward, 2000-1887 audiobook, LibriVox.

The Musical Telephone – a play based on a chapter in Edward Bellamy's
Looking Backward, 2000-1887
