**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Low-density%20lipoprotein\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Low-density lipoprotein
=======================

-   *There is both "large" and "small" particle LDL, and while only
    small is associated with cholesterol-related issues, neither is
    "bad".*

-   *It is important to note that LDL is not "bad cholesterol".*

-   *Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is one of the five major groups of
    lipoprotein which transport all fat molecules around the body in the
    extracellular water.*

-   *Even "small" LDL is necessary to conduct nutrients to vessels that
    "large" LDL can't reach.*

Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) is one of the five major groups of
lipoprotein which transport all fat molecules around the body in the
extracellular water. These groups, from least dense, compared to
surrounding water (largest particles) to most dense (smallest
particles), are chylomicrons (aka ULDL by the overall density naming
convention), very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL), intermediate-density
lipoprotein (IDL), low-density lipoprotein and high-density lipoprotein
(HDL). LDL delivers fat molecules to the cells and can drive the
progression of atherosclerosis if they become oxidized within the walls
of arteries.

It is important to note that LDL is not "bad cholesterol". It is an
essential transport system for lipids the human body needs to survive,
including cholesterol. There is both "large" and "small" particle LDL,
and while only small is associated with cholesterol-related issues,
neither is "bad". Even "small" LDL is necessary to conduct nutrients to
vessels that "large" LDL can't reach.

Overview
========

-   *The conventional interpretation of cholesterol levels holds that
    higher levels of LDL particles pose increased risk of cardiovascular
    disease.*

-   *Lipoproteins are complex particles composed of multiple proteins,
    typically 80–100 proteins/particle (organized by a single
    apolipoprotein B for LDL and the larger particles).*

Lipoproteins transfer lipids (fats) around the body in the extracellular
fluid, making fats available to body cells for receptor-mediated
endocytosis. Lipoproteins are complex particles composed of multiple
proteins, typically 80–100 proteins/particle (organized by a single
apolipoprotein B for LDL and the larger particles). A single LDL
particle is about 220–275 angstroms in diameter, typically transporting
3,000 to 6,000 fat molecules/particle, and varying in size according to
the number and mix of fat molecules contained within. The lipids carried
include all fat molecules with cholesterol, phospholipids, and
triglycerides dominant; amounts of each varying considerably.

The conventional interpretation of cholesterol levels holds that higher
levels of LDL particles pose increased risk of cardiovascular disease.
LDL particles are thought to invade the endothelium and become oxidized,
since the oxidized forms would be more easily retained by the
proteoglycans.\[citation needed\] This view has been challenged as
inaccurate and based on flawed research methodology. The issue remains
controversial and vigorously contested in the literature.

Biochemistry
============

Structure
=========

-   *Since LDL particles contain a variable and changing number of fatty
    acid molecules, there is a distribution of LDL particle mass and
    size.*

-   *Determining the structure of LDL has been a tough task because of
    its heterogeneous structure.*

-   *LDL particles are approximately 22 nm (0.00000087 in.)*

-   *Each native LDL particle enables emulsification, i.e.*

Each native LDL particle enables emulsification, i.e.
surrounding/packaging all fatty acids being carried, enabling these fats
to move around the body within the water outside cells. Each particle
contains a single apolipoprotein B-100 molecule (Apo B-100, a protein
that has 4536 amino acid residues and a mass of 514 kDa), along with 80
to 100 additional ancillary proteins. Each LDL has a highly hydrophobic
core consisting of polyunsaturated fatty acid known as linoleate and
hundreds to thousands (about 1500 commonly cited as an average)
esterified and unesterified cholesterol molecules. This core also
carries varying numbers of triglycerides and other fats and is
surrounded by a shell of phospholipids and unesterified cholesterol, as
well as the single copy of Apo B-100. LDL particles are approximately
22 nm (0.00000087 in.) to 27.5 nm in diameter and have a mass of about 3
million daltons. Since LDL particles contain a variable and changing
number of fatty acid molecules, there is a distribution of LDL particle
mass and size. Determining the structure of LDL has been a tough task
because of its heterogeneous structure. The structure of LDL at human
body temperature in native condition, with a resolution of about 16
Angstroms using cryogenic electron microscopy, has been recently
described.

Physiology
==========

-   *LDL particles are formed as VLDL lose triglyceride through the
    action of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and they become smaller and
    denser (i.e.*

-   *fewer fat molecules with same protein transport shell), containing
    a higher proportion of cholesterol esters.*

LDL particles are formed as VLDL lose triglyceride through the action of
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and they become smaller and denser (i.e. fewer
fat molecules with same protein transport shell), containing a higher
proportion of cholesterol esters.\[citation needed\]

Transport into the cell
=======================

-   *If LDL receptors bind to PCSK9, however, transport of LDL receptors
    is redirected to the lysosome, where they are degraded.*

-   *Vesicles containing LDL receptors bound to LDL are delivered to the
    endosome.*

-   *When LDL receptors bind LDL particles in the bloodstream, the
    clathrin-coated pits are endocytosed into the cell.*

-   *LDL is then shipped to the lysosome, where cholesterol esters in
    the LDL are hydrolysed.*

When a cell requires additional cholesterol (beyond its current internal
HMGCoA production pathway), it synthesizes the necessary LDL receptors
as well as PCSK9, a proprotein convertase that marks the LDL receptor
for degradation. LDL receptors are inserted into the plasma membrane and
diffuse freely until they associate with clathrin-coated pits. When LDL
receptors bind LDL particles in the bloodstream, the clathrin-coated
pits are endocytosed into the cell.

Vesicles containing LDL receptors bound to LDL are delivered to the
endosome. In the presence of low pH, such as that found in the endosome,
LDL receptors undergo a conformation change, releasing LDL. LDL is then
shipped to the lysosome, where cholesterol esters in the LDL are
hydrolysed. LDL receptors are typically returned to the plasma membrane,
where they repeat this cycle. If LDL receptors bind to PCSK9, however,
transport of LDL receptors is redirected to the lysosome, where they are
degraded.

Role in the innate immune system
================================

-   *LDL interfere with the quorum sensing system that upregulates genes
    required for invasive Staphylococcus aureus infection.*

LDL interfere with the quorum sensing system that upregulates genes
required for invasive Staphylococcus aureus infection. The mechanism of
antagonism entails binding apolipoprotein B to a S. aureus autoinducer
pheromone, preventing signaling through its receptor. Mice deficient in
apolipoprotein B are more susceptible to invasive bacterial infection.

LDL size patterns
=================

-   *There has also been noted a correspondence between higher
    triglyceride levels and higher levels of smaller, denser LDL
    particles and alternately lower triglyceride levels and higher
    levels of the larger, less dense ("buoyant") LDL.*

-   *LDL can be grouped based on its size: large low density LDL
    particles are described as pattern A, and small high density LDL
    particles are pattern B.*

LDL can be grouped based on its size: large low density LDL particles
are described as pattern A, and small high density LDL particles are
pattern B. Pattern B has been associated by some with a higher risk for
coronary heart disease. This is thought to be because the smaller
particles are more easily able to penetrate the endothelium of arterial
walls. Pattern I, for intermediate, indicates that most LDL particles
are very close in size to the normal gaps in the endothelium (26 nm).
According to one study, sizes 19.0–20.5 nm were designated as pattern B
and LDL sizes 20.6–22 nm were designated as pattern A. Other studies
have shown no such correlation at all.

Some evidence suggests the correlation between Pattern B and CHD is
stronger than the correspondence between the LDL number measured in the
standard lipid profile test. Tests to measure these LDL subtype patterns
have been more expensive and not widely available, so the common lipid
profile test is used more often.\[citation needed\]

There has also been noted a correspondence between higher triglyceride
levels and higher levels of smaller, denser LDL particles and
alternately lower triglyceride levels and higher levels of the larger,
less dense ("buoyant") LDL.

With continued research, decreasing cost, greater availability and wider
acceptance of other lipoprotein subclass analysis assay methods,
including NMR spectroscopy, research studies have continued to show a
stronger correlation between human clinically obvious cardiovascular
events and quantitatively measured particle concentrations.

Oxidized LDL
============

-   *Atherogenicity of oxidized LDL has been explained by lack of
    recognition of oxidation-modified LDL structures by the LDL
    receptors, preventing the normal metabolism of LDL particles and
    leading eventually to development of atherosclerotic plaques.*

-   *Oxidized LDL is a general term for LDL particles with oxidatively
    modified structural components.*

Oxidized LDL is a general term for LDL particles with oxidatively
modified structural components. As a result from free radical attack,
both lipid and protein parts of LDL can be oxidized in the vascular
wall. Besides the oxidative reactions taking place in vascular wall,
oxidized lipids in LDL can also be derived from oxidized dietary lipids.
Oxidized LDL is known to associate with the development of
atherosclerosis, and it is therefore widely studied as a potential risk
factor of cardiovascular diseases. Atherogenicity of oxidized LDL has
been explained by lack of recognition of oxidation-modified LDL
structures by the LDL receptors, preventing the normal metabolism of LDL
particles and leading eventually to development of atherosclerotic
plaques. Of the lipid material contained in LDL, various lipid oxidation
products are known as the ultimate atherogenic species. Acting as a
transporter of these injurious molecules is another mechanism by which
LDL can increase the risk of atherosclerosis.

Testing
=======

-   *In 2008, the ADA and ACC recognized direct LDL particle measurement
    by NMR as superior for assessing individual risk of cardiovascular
    events.*

-   *Blood tests commonly report LDL-C: the amount of cholesterol which
    is estimated to be contained with LDL particles, on average, using a
    formula, the Friedewald equation.*

Blood tests commonly report LDL-C: the amount of cholesterol which is
estimated to be contained with LDL particles, on average, using a
formula, the Friedewald equation. In clinical context, mathematically
calculated estimates of LDL-C are commonly used as an estimate of how
much low density lipoproteins are driving progression of
atherosclerosis. The problem with this approach is that LDL-C values are
commonly discordant with both direct measurements of LDL particles and
actual rates of atherosclerosis progression.

Direct LDL measurements are also available and better reveal individual
issues but are less often promoted or done due to slightly higher costs
and being available from only a couple of laboratories in the United
States. In 2008, the ADA and ACC recognized direct LDL particle
measurement by NMR as superior for assessing individual risk of
cardiovascular events.

Estimation of LDL particles via cholesterol content
===================================================

-   *It is possible that the LDL cholesterol concentration can be low,
    yet LDL particle number high and cardiovascular events rates are
    high.*

-   *The lipid profile does not measure LDL particles.*

-   *Correspondingly, it is possible that LDL cholesterol concentration
    can be relatively high, yet LDL particle number low and
    cardiovascular events are also low.*

Chemical measures of lipid concentration have long been the most-used
clinical measurement, not because they have the best correlation with
individual outcome, but because these lab methods are less expensive and
more widely available.

The lipid profile does not measure LDL particles. It only estimates them
using the Friedewald equation\
by subtracting the amount of cholesterol associated with other
particles, such as HDL and VLDL, assuming a prolonged fasting state,
etc.:

L\
≈\
C\
−\
H\
−\
k\
T\
\
\
{\\displaystyle L\\approx C-H-kT}

where H is HDL cholesterol, L is LDL cholesterol, C is total
cholesterol, T are triglycerides, and k is 0.20 if the quantities are
measured in mg/dl and 0.45 if in mmol/l.

There are limitations to this method, most notably that samples must be
obtained after a 12 to 14 h fast and that LDL-C cannot be calculated if
plasma triglyceride is &gt;4.52 mmol/L (400 mg/dL). Even at triglyceride
levels 2.5 to 4.5 mmol/L, this formula is considered inaccurate. If both
total cholesterol and triglyceride levels are elevated then a modified
formula, with quantities in mg/dl, may be used

L\
=\
C\
−\
H\
−\
0.16\
T\
\
\
{\\displaystyle L=C-H-0.16T}

This formula provides an approximation with fair accuracy for most
people, assuming the blood was drawn after fasting for about 14 hours or
longer, but does not reveal the actual LDL particle concentration
because the percentage of fat molecules within the LDL particles which
are cholesterol varies, as much as 8:1 variation.

However, the concentration of LDL particles, and to a lesser extent
their size, has a stronger and consistent correlation with individual
clinical outcome than the amount of cholesterol within LDL particles,
even if the LDL-C estimation is approximately correct. There is
increasing evidence and recognition of the value of more targeted and
accurate measurements of LDL particles. Specifically, LDL particle
number (concentration), and to a lesser extent size, have shown slightly
stronger correlations with atherosclerotic progression and
cardiovascular events than obtained using chemical measures of the
amount of cholesterol carried by the LDL particles. It is possible that
the LDL cholesterol concentration can be low, yet LDL particle number
high and cardiovascular events rates are high. Correspondingly, it is
possible that LDL cholesterol concentration can be relatively high, yet
LDL particle number low and cardiovascular events are also low. If LDL
particle concentration is used to predict cardiovascular events, many
other correlates of these clinical outcomes, such as diabetes mellitus,
obesity and smoking, lose most of their predictive
accuracy.\[clarification needed\]

Normal ranges
=============

-   *It was found that although LDL cholesterol reporting and control
    for diabetes and coronary heart disease visits improved continuously
    between 1995 and 2004\[citation needed\], neither the 1998 ADA
    guidelines nor the 2001 ATP III guidelines increased LDL cholesterol
    control for diabetes relative to coronary heart disease.*

-   *It has been estimated from the results of multiple human
    pharmacologic LDL lowering trials that LDL should be lowered to
    below 30 to reduce cardiovascular event rates to near zero.*

In the USA, the American Heart Association, NIH, and NCEP provide a set
of guidelines for fasting LDL-Cholesterol levels, estimated or measured,
and risk for heart disease. As of about 2005, these guidelines were:

Over time, with more clinical research, these recommended levels keep
being reduced because LDL reduction, including to abnormally low levels,
was the most effective strategy for reducing cardiovascular death rates
in one large double blind, randomized clinical trial of men with
hypercholesterolemia; far more effective than coronary
angioplasty/stenting or bypass surgery

For instance, for people with known atherosclerosis diseases, the 2004
updated American Heart Association, NIH and NCEP recommendations are for
LDL levels to be lowered to less than 70 mg/dL, unspecified how much
lower. This low level of less than 70 mg/dL (higher than Tim Russert's
value shortly prior to his heart attack) was recommended for primary
prevention of 'very-high risk patients' and in secondary prevention as a
'reasonable further reduction'. Lack of evidence for such a
recommendation is discussed in an article in the Annals of Internal
Medicine. It should also be noted that statin drugs involved in such
clinical trials have numerous physiological effects beyond simply the
reduction of LDL levels.

It has been estimated from the results of multiple human pharmacologic
LDL lowering trials that LDL should be lowered to below 30 to reduce
cardiovascular event rates to near zero. For reference, from
longitudinal population studies following progression of
atherosclerosis-related behaviors from early childhood into adulthood,
it has been discovered that the usual LDL in childhood, before the
development of fatty streaks, is about 35 mg/dL. However, all the above
values refer to chemical measures of lipid/cholesterol concentration
within LDL, not measured low-density lipoprotein concentrations, the
accurate approach.

The feasibility of these figures has been questioned by sceptics,
claiming that many members of the AHA and NIH are heavily associated
with pharmaceutical companies giving them bias towards lowering
cholesterol levels and such guidelines giving rise to increased use of
cholesterol lowering medicine such as statins.\[citation needed\]

A study was conducted measuring the effects of guideline changes on LDL
cholesterol reporting and control for diabetes visits in the US from
1995 to 2004. It was found that although LDL cholesterol reporting and
control for diabetes and coronary heart disease visits improved
continuously between 1995 and 2004\[citation needed\], neither the 1998
ADA guidelines nor the 2001 ATP III guidelines increased LDL cholesterol
control for diabetes relative to coronary heart disease.

Direct measurement of LDL particle concentrations
=================================================

-   *Debate continues that it is "...unclear whether LDL particle size
    measurements add value to measurement of LDL-particle
    concentration", though outcomes have always tracked LDL particle,
    not LDL-C, concentrations.*

-   *There are two other assays for LDL particles, however, like LDL-C,
    most only estimate LDL particle concentrations.*

There are several competing methods for measurement of lipoprotein
particle concentrations and size. The evidence is that the NMR
methodology (developed, automated & greatly reduced in costs while
improving accuracy as pioneered by Jim Otvos and associates) results in
a 22-25% reduction in cardiovascular events within one year, contrary to
the longstanding claims by many in the medical industry that the
superiority over existing methods was weak, even by statements of some
proponents.

Since the later 1990s, because of the development of NMR measurements,
it has been possible to clinically measure lipoprotein particles at
lower cost \[under \$80 US (including shipping) & is decreasing; versus
the previous costs of &gt;\$400 to &gt;\$5,000\] and higher accuracy.
There are two other assays for LDL particles, however, like LDL-C, most
only estimate LDL particle concentrations.

Direct LDL particle measurement by NMR was mentioned by the ADA and ACC,
in a 28 March 2008 joint consensus statement, as having advantages for
predicting individual risk of atherosclerosis disease events, but the
statement noted that the test is less widely available, is more
expensive \[about \$13.00 US (2015 without insurance coverage) from some
labs which use the Vantera Analyzer\]. Debate continues that it is
"...unclear whether LDL particle size measurements add value to
measurement of LDL-particle concentration", though outcomes have always
tracked LDL particle, not LDL-C, concentrations.

Using NMR, as pioneered by researcher Jim Otvos and the North Carolina
State University academic research spin-off company LipoScience, the
total LDL particle concentrations, in nmol/L plasma, are typically
subdivided by percentiles referenced to the 5,382 men and women, not on
any lipid medications, who are participating in the MESA trial.

Optimal ranges
==============

-   *Multiple other measures, including particle sizes, small LDL
    particle concentrations, large total and HDL particle
    concentrations, along with estimations of insulin resistance pattern
    and standard cholesterol lipid measurements (for comparison of the
    plasma data with the estimation methods discussed above) are also
    routinely provided.*

The LDL particle concentrations are typically categorized by
percentiles, &lt;20%, 20–50%, 50th–80th%, 80th–95% and &gt;95% groups of
the people participating and being tracked in the MESA trial, a medical
research study sponsored by the United States National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute.

The lowest incidence of atherosclerotic events over time occurs within
the &lt;20% group, with increased rates for the higher groups. Multiple
other measures, including particle sizes, small LDL particle
concentrations, large total and HDL particle concentrations, along with
estimations of insulin resistance pattern and standard cholesterol lipid
measurements (for comparison of the plasma data with the estimation
methods discussed above) are also routinely provided.

Lowering LDL-cholesterol
========================

-   *Thus even if the hundreds to thousands of cholesterol molecules
    within an average LDL particle were measured, this does not reflect
    the other fat molecules or even the number of LDL particles.*

-   *Also keep in mind that LDL particles carry many fat molecules
    (typically 3,000 to 6,000 fat molecules per LDL particle); this
    includes cholesterol, triglycerides, phospholipids and others.*

-   *Keep in mind that LDL-C is not a measurement of actual LDL
    particles.*

The mevalonate pathway serves as the basis for the biosynthesis of many
molecules, including cholesterol. The enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A reductase (HMG CoA reductase) is an essential component and
performs the first of 37 steps within the cholesterol production
pathway, and present in every animal cell.

Keep in mind that LDL-C is not a measurement of actual LDL particles.
LDL-C is only an estimate (not measured from the individual's blood
sample) of how much cholesterol is being transported by all LDL
particles, which is either a smaller concentration of large particles or
a high concentration of small particles. Also keep in mind that LDL
particles carry many fat molecules (typically 3,000 to 6,000 fat
molecules per LDL particle); this includes cholesterol, triglycerides,
phospholipids and others. Thus even if the hundreds to thousands of
cholesterol molecules within an average LDL particle were measured, this
does not reflect the other fat molecules or even the number of LDL
particles.

Pharmaceutical
==============

-   *As with statins, this decrease in intra-hepatic (liver) LDL levels
    may induce hepatic LDL receptor up-regulation, also decreasing
    plasma LDL levels.*

-   *Lowering the blood lipid concentration of triglycerides helps lower
    the concentration of small LDL particles, because fatty-acid rich
    VLDL particles convert in the bloodstream into small dense LDL
    particles.*

PCSK9 inhibitors, in clinical trials, by several companies, are more
effective for LDL reduction than the statins, including statins alone at
high dose (though not necessarily the combination of statins plus
ezetimibe).

Statins reduce high levels of LDL particles by inhibiting the enzyme
HMG-CoA reductase in cells, the rate-limiting step of cholesterol
synthesis. To compensate for the decreased cholesterol availability,
synthesis of LDL receptors (including hepatic) is increased, resulting
in an increased clearance of LDL particles from the extracellular water,
including of the blood.

Ezetimibe reduces intestinal absorption of cholesterol, thus can reduce
LDL particle concentrations when combined with statins.

Niacin (B3), lowers LDL by selectively inhibiting hepatic diacylglycerol
acyltransferase 2, reducing triglyceride synthesis and VLDL secretion
through a receptor HM74 and HM74A or GPR109A.

Several CETP inhibitors have been researched to improve HDL
concentrations, but so far, despite dramatically increasing HDL-C, have
not had a consistent track record in reducing atherosclerosis disease
events. Some have increased mortality rates compared with placebo.

Clofibrate is effective at lowering cholesterol levels, but has been
associated with significantly increased cancer and stroke mortality,
despite lowered cholesterol levels. Other, more recently developed and
tested fibrates, e.g. fenofibric acid have had a better track record and
are primarily promoted for lowering VLDL particles (triglycerides), not
LDL particles, yet can help some in combination with other strategies.

Some Tocotrienols, especially delta- and gamma-tocotrienols, are being
promoted as statin alternative non-prescription agents to treat high
cholesterol, having been shown in vitro to have an effect. In
particular, gamma-tocotrienol appears to be another HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor, and can reduce cholesterol production. As with statins, this
decrease in intra-hepatic (liver) LDL levels may induce hepatic LDL
receptor up-regulation, also decreasing plasma LDL levels. As always, a
key issue is how benefits and complications of such agents compare with
statins—molecular tools that have been analyzed in large numbers of
human research and clinical trials since the mid-1970s.

Phytosterols are widely recognized as having a proven LDL cholesterol
lowering efficacy, although no scientifically proven beneficial effect
on cardiovascular disease (CVD) or overall mortality exists. Current
supplemental guidelines for reducing LDL recommend doses of phytosterols
in the 1.6-3.0 grams per day range (Health Canada, EFSA, ATP III, FDA)
with a recent meta-analysis demonstrating an 8.8% reduction in
LDL-cholesterol at a mean dose of 2.15 gram per day.

Insulin induces HMG-CoA reductase activity, whereas glucagon diminishes
HMG-CoA reductase activity. While glucagon production is stimulated by
dietary protein ingestion, insulin production is stimulated by dietary
carbohydrate.\[citation needed\] The rise of insulin is, in general,
determined by the digestion of carbohydrates into glucose and subsequent
increase in serum glucose levels. In non-diabetics, glucagon levels are
very low when insulin levels are high; however, those who have become
diabetic no longer suppress glucagon output after eating.

Lowering the blood lipid concentration of triglycerides helps lower the
concentration of small LDL particles, because fatty-acid rich VLDL
particles convert in the bloodstream into small dense LDL
particles.\[vague\]

Lifestyle
=========

-   *A ketogenic diet may have similar response to taking niacin
    (lowered LDL and increased HDL) through beta-hydroxybutyrate, a
    ketone body, coupling the niacin receptor (HM74A).*

-   *resistin \[citation needed\], which increase insulin resistance and
    circulating VLDL particle concentrations, thus both increasing LDL
    particle concentrations and accelerating the development of diabetes
    mellitus.*

The most effective approach has been minimizing fat stores located
inside the abdominal cavity (visceral body fat) in addition to
minimizing total body fat.\[citation needed\] Visceral fat, which is
more metabolically active than subcutaneous fat, has been found to
produce many enzymatic signals, e.g. resistin \[citation needed\], which
increase insulin resistance and circulating VLDL particle
concentrations, thus both increasing LDL particle concentrations and
accelerating the development of diabetes mellitus.

A ketogenic diet may have similar response to taking niacin (lowered LDL
and increased HDL) through beta-hydroxybutyrate, a ketone body, coupling
the niacin receptor (HM74A).

Antioxidants
============

-   *Because LDL particles appear harmless until they are within the
    blood vessel walls and oxidized by free radicals, it has been
    postulated that ingesting antioxidants and minimizing free radical
    exposure may reduce LDL's contribution to atherosclerosis, though
    results are not conclusive.*

Because LDL particles appear harmless until they are within the blood
vessel walls and oxidized by free radicals, it has been postulated that
ingesting antioxidants and minimizing free radical exposure may reduce
LDL's contribution to atherosclerosis, though results are not
conclusive.

See also
========

Notes and references
====================

External links
==============

-   *Fat (LDL) Degradation: PMAP The Proteolysis Map-animation*

Fat (LDL) Degradation: PMAP The Proteolysis Map-animation

Adult Treatment Panel III Full Report

ATP III Update 2004

O'Keefe JH, Cordain L, Harris WH, Moe RM, Vogel R (June 2004). "Optimal
low-density lipoprotein is 50 to 70 mg/dl: lower is better and
physiologically normal". Journal of the American College of Cardiology.
43 (11): 2142–6. doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2004.03.046. PMID 15172426.
