**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mae%20Mallory\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Mae Mallory
===========

-   *Mae Mallory (June 9, 1927 – 2007) was an activist of the Civil
    Rights Movement and a Black Power movement leader active in the
    1950s and 1960s.*

Mae Mallory (June 9, 1927 – 2007) was an activist of the Civil Rights
Movement and a Black Power movement leader active in the 1950s and
1960s. She is best known as an advocate of school desegregation and of
black armed self-defense.

Life
====

-   *In 1956, Mallory was a founder and spokesperson of the "Harlem 9",
    a group of African-American mothers who protested the inferior and
    inadequate conditions in segregated New York City schools.*

-   *While the children were engaged in another boycott in 1960, the
    campaign established some of the first freedom schools of the civil
    rights movement to educate them.*

Mallory was born in Macon, Georgia, on June 9, 1927. She later went to
live in New York City with her mother in 1939.

In 1956, Mallory was a founder and spokesperson of the "Harlem 9", a
group of African-American mothers who protested the inferior and
inadequate conditions in segregated New York City schools. Inspired by a
report by Kenneth and Mamie Clark on inexperienced teachers, overcrowded
classrooms, dilapidated conditions, and gerrymandering to promote
segregation in New York, the group sought to transfer their children to
integrated schools that offered higher quality resources.

"Harlem 9" activism included lawsuits against the city and state, filed
with the help of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored
People (NAACP). By 1958 it escalated to public protests and a 162-day
boycott involving 10,000 parents. The boycott campaign did not win
formal support from the NAACP, but was assisted by leaders such as Ella
Baker and Adam Clayton Powell, and endorsed by African-American
newspapers such as the Amsterdam News. While the children were engaged
in another boycott in 1960, the campaign established some of the first
freedom schools of the civil rights movement to educate them.

New York City retaliated against the mothers, trying and failing to
prosecute them for negligence. In 1960, Mallory and the Harlem 9 won
their lawsuit, and the Board of Education allowed them, and over a
thousand other parents, to transfer their children to integrated
schools. That year, the Board of Education announced a general policy of
Open Enrollment, and thousands more black children transferred to
integrated schools over the next five years. (Overall integration in the
city was thwarted, however, by the practice of white flight.)

She supported Robert F. Williams, the Monroe, North Carolina NAACP
chapter leader, and author of Negroes with Guns,\
During the Freedom Rides in August 1961, she worked with Williams in
protecting Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) activists
who were demonstrating in Monroe. This led to armed confrontations with
white supremacists and allegations of kidnapping a white couple.

She went to Ohio, and was supported by the Monroe Defense Committee, and
the Workers World Party, in her extradition and kidnapping trial. In
1961–65, she was jailed for kidnapping, but was later released after the
North Carolina Supreme Court determined racial discrimination in the
jury selection. COINTELPRO tried to break up the support group Committee
to Support the Monroe Defendants.

She mentored Yuri Kochiyama.

She was a friend of Madalyn Murray O'Hair.\
On February 21, 1965, Mallory was present at the assassination of
Malcolm X at the Audubon Ballroom.\
In April 1965, she was instrumental in a Times Square protest against
the 1965 United States occupation of the Dominican Republic.\
On August 8, 1966, she spoke at an anti-Vietnam War rally.

She was an organizer of the Sixth Pan-African Congress held in Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania, in 1974. In 1974, she lived in Mwanza, Tanzania.

Her papers are held at the Walter P. Reuther Library at Wayne State
University.

Works
=====

-   *Letters from Prison, Mae Mallory.*

-   *Paula Marie Seniors, "Mae Mallory, The Monroe Defense Committee,
    and World Revolutions: "African American Women Radical Activists
    (1958-1987)," The University of Georgia Press, Forthcoming*

-   *A. T. Simpson, "After one year of hell Mae Mallory is still a
    champion", Workers World, October 26, 1962.*

-   *Monroe Defense Committee, c. 1962.*

Letters from Prison, Mae Mallory. Monroe Defense Committee, c. 1962.

Paula Marie Seniors, "Mae Mallory, The Monroe Defense Committee, and
World Revolutions: "African American Women Radical Activists
(1958-1987)," The University of Georgia Press, Forthcoming

Paula Marie Seniors, "Mae Mallory and "The Southern Belle Fantasy Trope"
at The Cuyahoga County Jail 21st and Payne PAIN," From Uncle Tom's Cabin
to The Help: Critical Perspectives on White-Authored Narratives of Black
Life, Claire Garcia, Vershawn Young, editors, Palgrave Macmillan, August
2014.

A. T. Simpson, "After one year of hell Mae Mallory is still a champion",
Workers World, October 26, 1962.

References
==========
