**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malik\_Ishaq\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Malik Ishaq
===========

-   *Ishaq was killed, along with his two sons and deputy Ghulam Rasool
    Shah, in a police encounter on 29 July 2015, the circumstances of
    which are disputed.*

-   *Malik Ishaq (Urdu: ملک اسحاق ‎; 1959 – 29 July 2015) was a
    Pakistani militant, Sunni supremacist, and leader of globally
    designated terrorist organization Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ).*

Malik Ishaq (Urdu: ملک اسحاق ‎; 1959 – 29 July 2015) was a Pakistani
militant, Sunni supremacist, and leader of globally designated terrorist
organization Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LeJ).

Formerly a member of anti-Shia militant group Sipah-e-Sahaba, Ishaq
co-founded the LeJ in 1996. Under Ishaq's leadership, the LeJ claimed
responsibility for several mass-casualty attacks largely targeting
Pakistan's Shia and Barelvi population, including multiple bombings that
killed over 200 Hazara Shias in Quetta in 2013. He was also accused of
masterminding the attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team in Lahore in
2009, and the Ashura bombings in Afghanistan in 2011.

Ishaq was killed, along with his two sons and deputy Ghulam Rasool Shah,
in a police encounter on 29 July 2015, the circumstances of which are
disputed. Punjab Home Minister Shuja Khanzada was assassinated in Attock
a month later, in an attack claimed by LeJ as retaliation. Ishaq was
described by various news agencies as Pakistan's most feared terror
kingpin.

Early life
==========

-   *Malik Ishaq was born to a poor family in Taranda Sawaey Khan in
    Rahim Yar Khan District of Punjab, Pakistan.*

-   *Educated until sixth class, Ishaq spent three years working at his
    father’s shop until 1984, when he began working as a cigarette
    vendor according to police records.*

Malik Ishaq was born to a poor family in Taranda Sawaey Khan in Rahim
Yar Khan District of Punjab, Pakistan. His father was a cloth merchant.
Educated until sixth class, Ishaq spent three years working at his
father’s shop until 1984, when he began working as a cigarette vendor
according to police records.

Sipah-e-Sahaba member
=====================

-   *The SSP claimed to be countering the Iranian Revolution and the
    Pakistan-based pro-Iranian Shia activist group Tehreek Nifaz-e-Fiqh
    Jafariya Pakistan.*

-   *Ishaq came under the influence of Haq Nawaz Jhangvi, the founder of
    anti-Shia militant group Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP), in the
    1980s.*

-   *Ishaq became an active participant in the SSP's activities, and was
    jailed for the first time for acts of hate speech during Muharram
    in 1989.*

Ishaq came under the influence of Haq Nawaz Jhangvi, the founder of
anti-Shia militant group Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP), in the 1980s.
The SSP claimed to be countering the Iranian Revolution and the
Pakistan-based pro-Iranian Shia activist group Tehreek Nifaz-e-Fiqh
Jafariya Pakistan. Ishaq became an active participant in the SSP's
activities, and was jailed for the first time for acts of hate speech
during Muharram in 1989.

Lashkar-e-Jhangvi co-founder and leader
=======================================

-   *In 1996, Ishaq, along with Riaz Basra and Akram Lahori, co-founded
    LeJ, a violent splinter group of the original SSP.*

-   *He assumed senior leadership of LeJ from jail after Basra was
    killed in a police encounter in 2002.*

-   *Forging ties with al Qaeda and the Pakistani Taliban following the
    9/11 attacks, Ishaq was charged with more than 100 murders and 45
    criminal cases, including masterminding the attack on the Sri Lankan
    cricket team in Lahore in 2009.*

In 1996, Ishaq, along with Riaz Basra and Akram Lahori, co-founded LeJ,
a violent splinter group of the original SSP. He confessed his
involvement in the killing of 102 Shias to an Urdu newspaper in October
1997, before being rearrested. He assumed senior leadership of LeJ from
jail after Basra was killed in a police encounter in 2002.

Forging ties with al Qaeda and the Pakistani Taliban following the 9/11
attacks, Ishaq was charged with more than 100 murders and 45 criminal
cases, including masterminding the attack on the Sri Lankan cricket team
in Lahore in 2009.

He was never convicted, owing to weak evidence and intimidation of
judges and witnesses.

Release and possible deal
=========================

-   *Soon after his release, The Associated Press reported Ishaq again
    making public speeches against the Shia community and threatening
    his opponents on 4 September 2011, saying "We know how to kill and
    how to die."*

-   *Ishaq was released on bail after 14 years in July 2011, amid
    speculation of a deal and growing ties with the Pakistan Muslim
    League (N), the ruling party in Punjab.*

-   *Ishaq was appointed Vice-President of Ahle Sunnat Wal Jamaat, the
    renamed SSP, in 2012.*

Ishaq was released on bail after 14 years in July 2011, amid speculation
of a deal and growing ties with the Pakistan Muslim League (N), the
ruling party in Punjab. He was showered with rose petals by supporters,
and received by Tahir Ashrafi and SSP president Ahmad Ludhianvi.

The province's Law Minister Rana Sanaullah denied there was any deal
behind Ishaq's release, but said extremist leaders were free to join
politics if they eschewed violence. Sanaullah said of the occasion, "We
are in touch with those who have become, or want to become, useful
citizens." Soon after his release, The Associated Press reported Ishaq
again making public speeches against the Shia community and threatening
his opponents on 4 September 2011, saying "We know how to kill and how
to die." Ishaq was appointed Vice-President of Ahle Sunnat Wal Jamaat,
the renamed SSP, in 2012.

Ashura bombings in Kabul and Mazar-i-Sharif
===========================================

-   *Ishaq's LeJ claimed responsibility.*

On 6 December 2011, a suicide bomber attacked the Abu Fazl Mosque in the
Murad Khane neighbourhood of Kabul, claiming more than 50 lives. The
second bomb took place near the Blue Mosque in the northern city of
Mazar-e-Sharif, where four people were killed. Ishaq's LeJ claimed
responsibility. Afghanistan President Hamid Karzai said he would discuss
the matter with Pakistan.

Quetta bombings
===============

-   *Taken together, the bombings were the deadliest attack against any
    minority in the history of Pakistan.*

-   *Ishaq was rearrested after the LeJ claimed responsibility for
    multiple bombings that killed over 200 Hazara Shias in Quetta in
    January and February, 2013.*

Ishaq was rearrested after the LeJ claimed responsibility for multiple
bombings that killed over 200 Hazara Shias in Quetta in January and
February, 2013. Taken together, the bombings were the deadliest attack
against any minority in the history of Pakistan.

Death and aftermath
===================

-   *Malik Ishaq was killed in Muzaffargarh, Punjab, in a police
    encounter with the Counter Terrorism Department of the Punjab Police
    on the morning of 29 July 2015, along with his two sons, Usman and
    Haq Nawaz.*

-   *According to the police, Ishaq and his associates were being
    shifted from Multan to Muzaffargarh to locate an illegal weapons
    storage site, when a group of armed supporters attacked the police
    convoy in an attempt to free Ishaq.*

Malik Ishaq was killed in Muzaffargarh, Punjab, in a police encounter
with the Counter Terrorism Department of the Punjab Police on the
morning of 29 July 2015, along with his two sons, Usman and Haq Nawaz.
Also killed among Ishaq's entourage were 11 others, including his deputy
and purported LeJ second-in-command Syed Ghulam Rasool Shah, as well as
Shah's two sons.

According to the police, Ishaq and his associates were being shifted
from Multan to Muzaffargarh to locate an illegal weapons storage site,
when a group of armed supporters attacked the police convoy in an
attempt to free Ishaq. This was disputed by local and international news
agencies including The Economist, which stated, "The police have barely
bothered to pretend the incident was anything other than a mass
extra-judicial killing."

Assassination of Home Minister Shuja Khanzada
=============================================

-   *Preliminary reports prepared by Pakistani law enforcement agencies
    suggested Khanzada was attacked in retaliation for the killing of
    Malik Ishaq.*

-   *The LeJ claimed responsibility for the attack, confirming it was
    for Ishaq's killing in July.*

On 16 August 2015, the home office of Punjab Home Minister Shuja
Khanzada, located in Shadikhan, Attock, was attacked by two suicide
bombers, killing Khanzada and 18 others. Preliminary reports prepared by
Pakistani law enforcement agencies suggested Khanzada was attacked in
retaliation for the killing of Malik Ishaq. The LeJ claimed
responsibility for the attack, confirming it was for Ishaq's killing in
July.

Notes
=====

External links
==============

-   *"Pakistan arrests Lashkar-e-Jhangvi leader Malik Ishaq".*

-   *Retrieved 20 February 2013.*

-   *28 October 2011.*

-   *"Pakistan's 'strategic' backwaters".*

-   *"The release of Malik Ishaq".*

-   *"Intelligence agencies asked to monitor Malik Ishaq".*

-   *Retrieved 28 July 2013.*

"A Profile of Lashkar-i-Jhangvi Leader Malik Ishaq | Combating Terrorism
Center at West Point". Ctc.usma.edu. Retrieved 28 July 2013.

Bill Roggio (22 February 2013). "Pakistan arrests Lashkar-e-Jhangvi
leader Malik Ishaq". The Long War Journal. Retrieved 28 July 2013.

"In Pakistan, a militant deal sours". Beta.dawn.com. 28 October 2011.
Retrieved 28 July 2013.

Siddiqui, Taha. "Intelligence agencies asked to monitor Malik Ishaq".
Tribune.com.pk. Retrieved 28 July 2013.

"The release of Malik Ishaq". Tribune.com.pk. Retrieved 28 July 2013.

"Pakistan's 'strategic' backwaters". Tribune.com.pk. Retrieved 20
February 2013.
