**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marianne%20Williamson\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Marianne Williamson
===================

-   *On January 29, 2019, she announced her campaign to seek the
    Democratic nomination for the 2020 United States presidential
    election.*

-   *Marianne Deborah Williamson (born July 8, 1952) is an American
    author, lecturer, and activist.*

-   *In 2014, as an independent, Williamson ran unsuccessfully for the
    seat of California's 33rd congressional district in the United
    States House of Representatives elections in California.*

Marianne Deborah Williamson (born July 8, 1952) is an American author,
lecturer, and activist. She has written 13 books, including four New
York Times number one bestsellers within the 'Advice, How To and
Miscellaneous' category. She is the founder of Project Angel Food, a
volunteer food delivery program that serves home-bound people with AIDS
and other life-threatening illnesses. She is also the co-founder of the
Peace Alliance, a nonprofit grassroots education and advocacy
organization supporting peace-building projects.

In 2014, as an independent, Williamson ran unsuccessfully for the seat
of California's 33rd congressional district in the United States House
of Representatives elections in California. On January 29, 2019, she
announced her campaign to seek the Democratic nomination for the 2020
United States presidential election.

Early life and education
========================

-   *Williamson was born in Houston, Texas, in 1952.*

-   *She is the youngest of three children of Samuel "Sam" Williamson,
    an immigration lawyer, and Sophie Ann (Kaplan), a homemaker.*

-   *After graduating from Houston's Bellaire High School, Williamson
    spent two years studying theater and philosophy at Pomona College in
    Claremont, California.*

Williamson was born in Houston, Texas, in 1952. She is the youngest of
three children of Samuel "Sam" Williamson, an immigration lawyer, and
Sophie Ann (Kaplan), a homemaker. Her family is Jewish. After graduating
from Houston's Bellaire High School, Williamson spent two years studying
theater and philosophy at Pomona College in Claremont, California.

Writing and speaking career
===========================

-   *Williamson dropped out of college her junior year in 1973 and moved
    to New York City, intending to pursue a career as a cabaret singer.*

Williamson dropped out of college her junior year in 1973 and moved to
New York City, intending to pursue a career as a cabaret singer.

In 1979, after delving into A Course in Miracles, she returned to
Houston, where she ran a combination metaphysical bookstore and
coffeeshop.

In 1983 she moved to Los Angeles. She began regularly lecturing on A
Course in Miracles in Los Angeles and New York City, and eventually in
other cities in the U.S. and Europe as well.

She published her first book, A Return to Love: Reflections on the
Principles of A Course in Miracles, in 1992.

Books
=====

-   *Williamson's first book, A Return To Love, was featured on The
    Oprah Winfrey Show in 1992 and remained on The New York Times
    bestseller list for 39 weeks in the 'Advice, How To and
    Miscellaneous' category.*

-   *She has published 12 other books, seven of which have been on the
    same New York Times bestseller list and four of which have been
    \#1.*

Williamson's first book, A Return To Love, was featured on The Oprah
Winfrey Show in 1992 and remained on The New York Times bestseller list
for 39 weeks in the 'Advice, How To and Miscellaneous' category. She has
published 12 other books, seven of which have been on the same New York
Times bestseller list and four of which have been \#1. She has sold more
than 3 million copies of her books. In 2018, she published a 20th
anniversary revised edition of Healing the Soul of America.

Healing the Soul of America
===========================

-   *In 1997 Williamson published her book Healing the Soul of America
    (hardcover originally titled The Healing of America) and began a
    more robust political engagement.*

In 1997 Williamson published her book Healing the Soul of America
(hardcover originally titled The Healing of America) and began a more
robust political engagement. In this book, she laid out plans to
"transform the American political consciousness and encourage powerful
citizen involvement to heal our society".

She wrote in the book,

Patricia Holt of the San Francisco Chronicle called it "A huge and
wondrous surprise.... The Healing of America somehow makes us proud to
be Americans, because every hope for democracy seems newly within our
grasp."

A 20th anniversary edition was published in 2018.

Television and media appearances
================================

-   *She has been a guest on television programs such as The Oprah
    Winfrey Show, Good Morning America, and Real Time with Bill Maher.*

She has been a guest on television programs such as The Oprah Winfrey
Show, Good Morning America, and Real Time with Bill Maher. In December
2006, a Newsweek magazine poll named her one of the 50 most influential
baby boomers. She bases her teaching and writing on A Course in
Miracles, a nonreligious self-study program of spiritual psychotherapy,
based on universal spiritual themes.

Social activism
===============

HIV/AIDS advocacy
=================

Centers for Living
==================

-   *She has said of that time that "there was so much love, because
    there was nothing to hold onto but love."*

-   *In response to the HIV/AIDS crises in the 1980s, Williamson founded
    the Los Angeles and Manhattan Centers for Living, which served as a
    refuge and non-medical support for people with HIV/AIDS.*

In response to the HIV/AIDS crises in the 1980s, Williamson founded the
Los Angeles and Manhattan Centers for Living, which served as a refuge
and non-medical support for people with HIV/AIDS. There they could
connect with a variety of psychological and emotional resources, as well
as community of support. She has said of that time that "there was so
much love, because there was nothing to hold onto but love."

Project Angel Food
==================

-   *The organization's food and nutrition services, including medically
    tailored meals and nutritional counseling, help under-served people
    throughout Los Angeles County who are too sick to shop or cook for
    themselves.*

In 1989, she launched Project Angel Food to build off the work of the
Centers for Living. Originally launched to support HIV/AIDS patients,
Project Angel Food expanded its outreach and currently cooks and
delivers more than 12,000 meals each week, free of charge, to the homes
of men, women and children affected by various life-threatening
illnesses. The organization's food and nutrition services, including
medically tailored meals and nutritional counseling, help under-served
people throughout Los Angeles County who are too sick to shop or cook
for themselves. In 2017, Project Angel Food served its 11 millionth
meal.

Women's advocacy
================

-   *Publishers Weekly said of the book: "Williamson gives sound,
    empowering advice on relationships, work, love, sex and
    childrearing."*

-   *In 1993 she published her \#1 NYT bestseller, A Woman’s Worth.*

-   *On the initiative she has said, “I want to be a cheerleader for
    women who have never even considered running for office or being
    involved in a campaign, but who in the quietness of their hearts
    might think, ‘Why not me?’” The events have focused on how to better
    address many social issues, including: child poverty, low levels of
    female representation in office, campaign finance reform, high
    levels of mass incarceration, among other issues.*

She has worked on behalf of women's empowerment issues for decades. In
1993 she published her \#1 NYT bestseller, A Woman’s Worth. Publishers
Weekly said of the book: "Williamson gives sound, empowering advice on
relationships, work, love, sex and childrearing."

In 2010, she launched a series of Sister Giant conferences, trainings,
and events to support individuals – particularly women – who want to
increase their efficacy as activists and/or run for office. On the
initiative she has said, “I want to be a cheerleader for women who have
never even considered running for office or being involved in a
campaign, but who in the quietness of their hearts might think, ‘Why not
me?’” The events have focused on how to better address many social
issues, including: child poverty, low levels of female representation in
office, campaign finance reform, high levels of mass incarceration,
among other issues.

Peace-building
==============

-   *In 2004, she co-founded The Peace Alliance, a nonprofit grassroots
    education and advocacy organization focused on increasing U.S.
    governmental support of peace-building approaches to domestic and
    international conflicts.*

-   *She has said of the need for this work: "You don’t just wait until
    there is a violent eruption and then just try to throw people in
    jail or just wait until there is a violent eruption and then try to
    bomb an entire country, there’s just a limit past which this is not
    workable.*

In 2004, she co-founded The Peace Alliance, a nonprofit grassroots
education and advocacy organization focused on increasing U.S.
governmental support of peace-building approaches to domestic and
international conflicts. She has said of the need for this work: "You
don’t just wait until there is a violent eruption and then just try to
throw people in jail or just wait until there is a violent eruption and
then try to bomb an entire country, there’s just a limit past which this
is not workable. Rather, you proactively seek to cultivate the
conditions of peace...so we can have a much more sophisticated analysis
of what it will take to create a more peaceful world."

Poverty alleviation
===================

-   *For years Williamson was a member of the Board of Directors and
    remains a public supporter of RESULTS, an organization aiming to
    create the political will to end hunger and poverty around the
    world.*

For years Williamson was a member of the Board of Directors and remains
a public supporter of RESULTS, an organization aiming to create the
political will to end hunger and poverty around the world. It lobbies
public officials, does research, and works with the media and the public
to addresses the causal issues of poverty. RESULTS has 100 U.S. local
chapters and works in six other countries.

Love America Tour
=================

-   *Starting in the winter of 2018, she began touring the United States
    as part of her Love America Tour, discussing how she believes "a
    revolution in consciousness paves the way to both personal and
    national renewal."*

Starting in the winter of 2018, she began touring the United States as
part of her Love America Tour, discussing how she believes "a revolution
in consciousness paves the way to both personal and national renewal."
Of the tour she said: "Our own disconnection from the political process,
lack of knowledge of how our system operates, lack of understanding of
our history, and confusion about many of the issues that confront us
now, have led in too many cases to a dangerous emotional disconnection
between our country and ourselves."

Political career
================

2014 U.S. House of Representatives campaign
===========================================

-   *In 2014 Williamson ran, as an Independent, for the seat of
    California's 33rd congressional district in the United States House
    of Representatives elections.*

-   *Alanis Morissette wrote and performed Williamson's campaign song,
    "Today".*

In 2014 Williamson ran, as an Independent, for the seat of California's
33rd congressional district in the United States House of
Representatives elections. Regarding her motivation for running, she has
said, "America has gone off the democratic rails. A toxic brew of
shrinking civil liberties and expanded corporate influence are poisoning
our democracy." Her core message was that "humanitarian values should
replace economic values as the ordering principle of our civilization."

Prominent elected and public officials endorsed her campaign, including
former Governors Jennifer Granholm and Jesse Ventura; former
Congressmembers Dennis Kucinich and Alan Grayson; and Van Jones, among
others. Alanis Morissette wrote and performed Williamson's campaign
song, "Today".

She campaigned on a broad array of progressive issues, including:
greater access to high-quality education and free college; child
poverty; economic justice; climate change & renewable energy; campaign
finance reform; universal health care; criminal justice reform; ending
perpetual war and increasing investments in peacebuilding; women’s
reproductive rights; and LGBTQ equality among others.

She finished fourth out of 16 candidates, with 14,335 votes for 13.2% of
the vote. Williamson said of the process and its outcome: "This
conversation of a politics of conscience, a politics of the heart, is
much bigger than any one woman winning a congressional seat. And if that
woman loses, the conversation goes on. My losing the congressional seat
is small; what’s big is the larger conversation ... you impact the
ethers, and that energy goes somewhere."

2020 presidential campaign
==========================

-   *Williamson officially launched her presidential campaign in Los
    Angeles on January 28, 2019, in front of an audience of 2,000
    attendees, and appointed Maurice Daniel, who served alongside Donna
    Brazile in Dick Gephardt's campaign for the Democratic nomination in
    1988, as her national campaign manager, with her campaign committee,
    "Marianne Williamson for President", officially filed on
    February 4.*

On November 15, 2018, Williamson announced the formation of a
presidential exploratory committee in a video in which she acclaimed
that there was a "miracle in this country in 1776 and we need another
one" which would require "a co-creative effort, an effort of love and a
gift of love, to our country and hopefully to our world". Visiting New
Hampshire in early January, she said that she "received enough positive
energy to make me feel I should take the next step", and subsequently
hired Brent Roske to lead her operation in Iowa. Roske, a film producer
who also contested the same 2014 primary for the seat now represented by
Ted Lieu, maintained a wide network of connections in Iowa due in part
to his previous involvement in the state, working on a political
television show about the 2016 caucuses. In response to the Iowa
Democratic Party's proposed creation of "virtual caucuses" in the 2020
race, Williamson's campaign announced that it would appoint 99 "Virtual
Iowa Caucus Captains" (each assigned to a single county) to turn out
supporters in both the virtual and in-person caucuses.

Williamson officially launched her presidential campaign in Los Angeles
on January 28, 2019, in front of an audience of 2,000 attendees, and
appointed Maurice Daniel, who served alongside Donna Brazile in Dick
Gephardt's campaign for the Democratic nomination in 1988, as her
national campaign manager, with her campaign committee, "Marianne
Williamson for President", officially filed on February 4. Following her
Los Angeles announcement, she held her Iowa kickoff in Des Moines on
January 31. On February 16, in addition to scheduling another trip to
New Hampshire, Williamson's campaign announced the appointment of former
Congressman Paul Hodes, who represented New Hampshire's 2nd
congressional district from 2007 to 2011, as New Hampshire state
director and senior campaign advisor. Former Georgia state assemblywoman
Gloria Bromell Tinubu, who returned to South Carolina in 2011 to run for
Congress in the state's 7th district and later joined Phil Noble's bid
for governor in 2018 as his running mate, served as South Carolina state
director and national senior advisor to the Williamson campaign, but
later ceased working with the campaign.

On May 9, Williamson's campaign announced that she had received enough
contributions from unique donors to enter the official primary debates,
having raised \$1.5 million in the first quarter of 2019, during which
the campaign received donations from 46,663 unique individuals. She
subsequently met the polling criteria, with three unique polls at 1%
from qualifying pollsters, on May 23. In June, Williamson confirmed that
she moved to Des Moines, Iowa in advance of the 2020 caucuses.

Political positions
===================

-   *Williamson claims to be a "pretty straight-line progressive
    Democrat", supporting an increase of the federal minimum wage to
    \$15 per hour, reducing wealth inequality, addressing climate
    change, and tackling student loan debt.*

-   *In doing so, Williamson became the only candidate in the Democratic
    field to submit a detailed plan for reparations for black Americans,
    though fellow Democratic presidential candidates Elizabeth Warren
    and Kamala Harris later pledged support for reparations in late
    February 2019.*

Williamson claims to be a "pretty straight-line progressive Democrat",
supporting an increase of the federal minimum wage to \$15 per hour,
reducing wealth inequality, addressing climate change, and tackling
student loan debt. She backs a "Medicare for All model", Deferred Action
for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) and a pathway to citizenship for
undocumented immigrants without a "serious criminal background", and
says that the U.S. needs to be an "honest broker" in the
Israeli–Palestinian conflict.

She ranks climate change as "the greatest moral challenge of our
generation" and backs the Green New Deal. She has called for the
establishment of a Department of Peace to expand global diplomacy,
mediation, and educational and economic development. She also voices
support for stricter gun control, criminal justice reform, improving
public education, free college tuition, raising the top marginal tax
rate to a point where high earners pay "their fair share of taxes",
describing her policies as a "renovation" of a "sociopathic economic
system" focused on "short-term profit maximization". She appeared to
oppose mandatory vaccinations when she described them as "Orwellian" and
stating "To me, it’s no different than the abortion debate." She later
stated that she misspoke, and "I support vaccines. Public safety must be
carefully balanced with the right of individuals to make their own
decisions." According to the Los Angeles Times, she "has a history of
skeptical comments about vaccinations."

Her signature campaign promise is a call for \$100 billion in
reparations for slavery to be distributed over 10 years by a group of
black leaders for selected "economic and education projects", and later
suggested distributing \$200 to \$500 billion on The Breakfast Club, a
sum far greater than any other primary contenders support. In doing so,
Williamson became the only candidate in the Democratic field to submit a
detailed plan for reparations for black Americans, though fellow
Democratic presidential candidates Elizabeth Warren and Kamala Harris
later pledged support for reparations in late February 2019.

Personal life
=============

-   *Williamson was briefly married.*

Williamson was briefly married. In 1990, she gave birth to a daughter,
India Emma.

Bibliography
============

-   *A Politics of Love: A Handbook for a New American Revolution
    (ISBN 0062873938)*

-   *Enchanted Love: The Mystical Power of Intimate Relationships
    (ISBN 9780684870250)*

A Return to Love, First Edition 1992 (.mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}ISBN 9780060927486)

Imagine What America Could Be in the 21st Century: Visions of a Better
Future from Leading American Thinkers (ISBN 0451204697)

Emma & Mommy Talk to God (ISBN 9780060799267)

Healing the Soul of America: Reclaiming Our Voices as Spiritual Citizens
(ISBN 9780684846224)

A Woman's Worth (ISBN 9780345386571)

Enchanted Love: The Mystical Power of Intimate Relationships
(ISBN 9780684870250)

Everyday Grace: Having Hope, Finding Forgiveness, And Making Miracles
(ISBN 9781573223515)

Illuminata: A Return to Prayer (ISBN 9781573225205)

The Gift of Change (ISBN 0060816112)

The Law of Divine Compensation: On Work, Money and Miracles
(ISBN 0062205412)

A Course in Weight Loss: 21 Spiritual Lessons for Surrendering Your
Weight Forever (ISBN 1401921531)

Tears to Triumph: The Spiritual Journey from Suffering to Enlightenment
(ISBN 9780062205445)

A Politics of Love: A Handbook for a New American Revolution
(ISBN 0062873938)

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Marianne Williamson, article and shows at Oprah.com*

-   *Marianne Williamson for President website*

-   *Marianne Williamson on "Politicking with Larry King"*

Official website

Marianne Williamson for President website

Marianne Williamson, article and shows at Oprah.com

Marianne Williamson on "Politicking with Larry King"

Sister Giant

The Peace Alliance

Project Angel Food
