**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mazars%20USA\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Mazars
======

-   *Mazars operates as a single entity as a fully integrated
    partnership.*

-   *Mazars is a global audit, accounting and consulting group employing
    more than 23,000 professionals in 89 countries through member
    firms.*

-   *Mazars publicizes its consolidated financial accounts, a move it
    claims is unusual for private audit and advisory firms.*

Mazars is a global audit, accounting and consulting group employing more
than 23,000 professionals in 89 countries through member firms. With
head offices in France, Mazars has a network of correspondent partners
and joint ventures in a further 21 countries and is a founding member of
the Praxity alliance, a network of independent firms.

Worldwide turnover for the integrated partnership for the fiscal year
ending August 2014 was 1.081 billion euros. Mazars operates as a single
entity as a fully integrated partnership. Mazars publicizes its
consolidated financial accounts, a move it claims is unusual for private
audit and advisory firms.

History
=======

-   *The original Mazars firm was formed in Rouen, Normandy in France in
    1945, by Robert Mazars.*

-   *Mazars stayed a local firm until the 1980s when former CEO Patrick
    de Cambourg started to internationalize the firm growing the
    business from 33 employees in 1977 to the global firm of today.*

The original Mazars firm was formed in Rouen, Normandy in France in
1945, by Robert Mazars. Mazars stayed a local firm until the 1980s when
former CEO Patrick de Cambourg started to internationalize the firm
growing the business from 33 employees in 1977 to the global firm of
today.

France
======

-   *Mazars merged with accounting firm Guérard Viala to form Mazars &
    Guérard in 1995.*

Mazars merged with accounting firm Guérard Viala to form Mazars &
Guérard in 1995.

United Kingdom
==============

-   *On 1 September 1998 Mazars & Guerard merged with the British
    accountancy firm Neville Russell and traded, in the UK, for a number
    of years as "Mazars Neville Russell".*

-   *Mazars is a keen advocate of a more open audit market and notably
    of joint audit.*

-   *In 2002, "Mazars Neville Russell", as well as its counterpart firms
    across Europe, changed the name to become simply Mazars.*

On 1 September 1998 Mazars & Guerard merged with the British accountancy
firm Neville Russell and traded, in the UK, for a number of years as
"Mazars Neville Russell". In 2002, "Mazars Neville Russell", as well as
its counterpart firms across Europe, changed the name to become simply
Mazars. Mazars currently employs 1,600 people in 20 offices in the UK
and turnover is around €100m.

In April 2007 Mazars merged with the London office of MRI Moores Rowland
which will create a firm with turnover in the UK exceeding £90million.

Mazars, prior to the MRI Moores Rowland merger, was listed as the
14th-largest accountancy firm in the UK with about £65 millions fee
income, however following the merger and with the merger between Grant
Thornton and RSM Robson Rhodes in the summer of 2007, Mazars was listed
as\
12th with an estimated fee income of £90.3m.

"Neville Russell" was founded in 1900 by Charles Neville Russell to work
principally with the insurance sector of the economy. Neville Russell
developed a reputation in London of being specialists in this area.

Mazars is a keen advocate of a more open audit market and notably of
joint audit.

Mazars is the main sponsor of Yorkshire County Cricket Club

Ireland
=======

-   *Mazars now has three offices in Ireland, in Dublin, Galway and
    Limerick with 22 Partners and over 400 professionals.*

-   *From then Mazars has gone from strength to strength in Ireland
    joining and merging other firms.*

-   *In 1987 Rawlison Hunter joined forces with Mazars.*

In 1987 Rawlison Hunter joined forces with Mazars. From then Mazars has
gone from strength to strength in Ireland joining and merging other
firms. Mazars now has three offices in Ireland, in Dublin, Galway and
Limerick with 22 Partners and over 400 professionals.

Netherlands
===========

-   *As of 2000 Mazars integrated "Paardekooper & Hoffman" (of the
    Netherlands), which employed 800 people.*

-   *In the Dutch audit market, Mazars ranks as the sixth-largest firm
    and contributes more than 15% of the total global turnover.*

As of 2000 Mazars integrated "Paardekooper & Hoffman" (of the
Netherlands), which employed 800 people. In the Dutch audit market,
Mazars ranks as the sixth-largest firm and contributes more than 15% of
the total global turnover.

Jan Paardekooper founded Paardekooper & Hoffman in 1927. The firm worked
with large clients involved in the maritime and harbour businesses of
Rotterdam.

Germany: Roever Broenner Susat Mazars
=====================================

-   *As of 2015, Roever Broenner Susat Mazars had twelve offices in
    German metropolitan areas, offering a range of audit, accountancy,
    tax, legal and advisory services.*

-   *In April 2015, Mazars and RBS RoeverBroennerSusat announced their
    merger which united about 1,000 professionals, including 68 partners
    and €110 million of turnover in the German market.*

In April 2015, Mazars and RBS RoeverBroennerSusat announced their merger
which united about 1,000 professionals, including 68 partners and €110
million of turnover in the German market. As of 2015, Roever Broenner
Susat Mazars had twelve offices in German metropolitan areas, offering a
range of audit, accountancy, tax, legal and advisory services.

Russia and Kyrgyzstan
=====================

-   *Mazars has been present in Russia since 1995 and is an
    international player in the Russian market of audit and consulting
    services.*

-   *Today, Mazars offices in Moscow, St. Petersburg and Bishkek
    (Kyrgyzstan) employ more than 250 professionals.*

-   *Mazars Russia is also a member of various international
    organizations: Association of European Businesses in Russia, CCI
    France Russie, Moscow Audit Chamber, ACCA, St. Petersburg
    International Business Association for North-West Russia.*

Mazars has been present in Russia since 1995 and is an international
player in the Russian market of audit and consulting services. Today,
Mazars offices in Moscow, St. Petersburg and Bishkek (Kyrgyzstan) employ
more than 250 professionals. Mazars client portfolio includes more than
600 companies, including credit institutions that are included in the
Top-100, large insurance and financial organizations, as well as banks
belonging to the largest international holdings. The company has
significantly improved its positions in annual ratings published by RAEX
(Expert RA) in May 2019. Mazars Russia is also a member of various
international organizations: Association of European Businesses in
Russia, CCI France Russie, Moscow Audit Chamber, ACCA, St. Petersburg
International Business Association for North-West Russia.

Greece
======

-   *Mazars in Greece became fully integrated to the Mazars Group as of
    1st September 2012 and is now operating under the Mazars brand with
    two offices in Athens and Thessaloniki and over 120 professionals.*

Mazars in Greece became fully integrated to the Mazars Group as of 1st
September 2012 and is now operating under the Mazars brand with two
offices in Athens and Thessaloniki and over 120 professionals.

China
=====

-   *In January 2016, Mazars and Chinese firm ZhongShen ZhongHuan
    announced their merger, adding a further 1,800 professionals to
    Mazars globally, including 83 partners, from 15 offices across
    mainland China.*

-   *Mrs. Zhang Liwen, Chief Chartered Accountant of ZhongShen
    ZhongHuan, was subsequently appointed to the Mazars Group Executive
    Board, while Mr. Shi Wenxian, Chief Partner of ZhongShen ZhongHuan,
    was appointed to the Mazars Group Governance Council.*

In January 2016, Mazars and Chinese firm ZhongShen ZhongHuan announced
their merger, adding a further 1,800 professionals to Mazars globally,
including 83 partners, from 15 offices across mainland China. Mrs. Zhang
Liwen, Chief Chartered Accountant of ZhongShen ZhongHuan, was
subsequently appointed to the Mazars Group Executive Board, while Mr.
Shi Wenxian, Chief Partner of ZhongShen ZhongHuan, was appointed to the
Mazars Group Governance Council.

Malaysia
========

-   *To implement the merger, a new firm, Mazars (AF 001954), was
    registered to assume all existing mandates and statutory audit
    appointments of the Kuala Lumpur office of Moores Rowland.*

-   *On 1 September 2008, the Kuala Lumpur office of Moores Rowland
    merged with the global integrated structure of Mazars.*

In 1986, Hew & Co (established in 1955) and Tan Toh Hua & Partners
(established in 1958) had merged to form Hew & Tan. In the year 1999,
Hew & Tan had changed their name to Moores Rowland as a rebranding
exercise. On 1 September 2008, the Kuala Lumpur office of Moores Rowland
merged with the global integrated structure of Mazars. To implement the
merger, a new firm, Mazars (AF 001954), was registered to assume all
existing mandates and statutory audit appointments of the Kuala Lumpur
office of Moores Rowland.

Pakistan
========

-   *In April, 2010 Mazars integrated BearingPoint into their business
    in Pakistan, thus adding advisory services in management and
    technology for sectors such as microfinance, financial services and
    within the public sector.*

In April, 2010 Mazars integrated BearingPoint into their business in
Pakistan, thus adding advisory services in management and technology for
sectors such as microfinance, financial services and within the public
sector.

Poland
======

-   *The Mazars office opened in Warsaw in 1992.*

The Mazars office opened in Warsaw in 1992.

Qatar
=====

-   *Mazars Ahmed Tawfik & Co. CPA specializes in audit, accounting, tax
    and advisory services and can count on 30 professionals in its
    office.*

-   *Further to a successful cooperation initiated in 2008, Ahmed Tawfik
    & Co. CPA, an accounting and auditing services firm in Qatar which
    traces its roots back to 1976, has joined Mazars international
    partnership in September 2011 and thus becoming Mazars Ahmed Tawfik
    & Co. CPA.*

Further to a successful cooperation initiated in 2008, Ahmed Tawfik &
Co. CPA, an accounting and auditing services firm in Qatar which traces
its roots back to 1976, has joined Mazars international partnership in
September 2011 and thus becoming Mazars Ahmed Tawfik & Co. CPA.

Mazars Ahmed Tawfik & Co. CPA specializes in audit, accounting, tax and
advisory services and can count on 30 professionals in its office.

Turkey
======

-   *Today Mazars Turkey operates in six offices – Istanbul (3 offices),
    Ankara, İzmir, Denizli, Gaziantep and Bursa – with a more than
    350-person workforce.*

-   *Mazars Denge was founded by two partners as Denge Denetim YMM A.S.
    in 1977.*

Mazars Denge was founded by two partners as Denge Denetim YMM A.S. in
1977. Today Mazars Turkey operates in six offices – Istanbul (3
offices), Ankara, İzmir, Denizli, Gaziantep and Bursa – with a more than
350-person workforce.

United States
=============

-   *The deal marked a new stage in Mazars’ international development.*

-   *Partners from both entities voted to incorporate 74 Weiser partners
    into Mazars’ international integrated partnership.*

-   *In April 2010, Mazars and Weiser, an audit and advisory firm with a
    strong presence in the northeastern region of the US, announced
    their merger.*

In April 2010, Mazars and Weiser, an audit and advisory firm with a
strong presence in the northeastern region of the US, announced their
merger. Partners from both entities voted to incorporate 74 Weiser
partners into Mazars’ international integrated partnership. The deal
marked a new stage in Mazars’ international development.

Since April 2019 Donald Trump’s attorneys have had an ongoing
controversy with a House Oversight and Reform Committee's request for
some of the president’s financial records.

Thailand
========

-   *Since then, Mazars Thailand has grown consistently to become the
    6th-largest international professional services firm in Thailand,
    with over 200 consultants and 8 partners.*

-   *In 2007, continuing its Asian expansion, Mazars merged with the
    Double Impact Group in Thailand.*

In 2007, continuing its Asian expansion, Mazars merged with the Double
Impact Group in Thailand.

Since then, Mazars Thailand has grown consistently to become the
6th-largest international professional services firm in Thailand, with
over 200 consultants and 8 partners.

Czech Republic
==============

-   *Mazars Czech Republic was founded in 1995 and employs around 180
    professionals.*

-   *In 2015, the managing partner of Mazars Czech Republic was Milan
    Prokopius.*

-   *Mazars offers wide range of services including: audit, accountancy,
    outsourcing, payroll, internal audit, actuarial, transaction
    advisory and HR agenda.*

-   *Mazars is, by domestic sales, the 7th biggest audit firm on the
    Czech market.*

Mazars Czech Republic was founded in 1995 and employs around 180
professionals. Mazars is, by domestic sales, the 7th biggest audit firm
on the Czech market. Mazars offers wide range of services including:
audit, accountancy, outsourcing, payroll, internal audit, actuarial,
transaction advisory and HR agenda. In 2015, the managing partner of
Mazars Czech Republic was Milan Prokopius.

Vietnam
=======

-   *Mazars Vietnam operates through its offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi
    Minh City.*

-   *The managing partner of Mazars in Vietnam is Marc Deschamps, based
    in Ho Chi Minh City.*

-   *Mazars has been established in Vietnam since 1994 and employs
    around 160 professionals and general staff.*

Mazars has been established in Vietnam since 1994 and employs around 160
professionals and general staff. Mazars Vietnam operates through its
offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City. The managing partner of Mazars in
Vietnam is Marc Deschamps, based in Ho Chi Minh City.

Australia
=========

-   *Mazars announced the acquisition of Australian-based financial
    modelling and training provider Corality Financial Group on 13 July
    2016 to form the new team Global Infrastructure Finance.*

-   *Mazars integrated Australian audit and advisory firm Duncan Dovico
    on 1 January 2016.*

Mazars integrated Australian audit and advisory firm Duncan Dovico on 1
January 2016. Mazars announced the acquisition of Australian-based
financial modelling and training provider Corality Financial Group on 13
July 2016 to form the new team Global Infrastructure Finance.

Uganda
======

-   *Mazars integrated Ugandan audit and advisory firm BRJ Partners on 1
    January 2018.*

-   *Mazars announced the integration with BRJ partners in the annual
    partners meeting.*

-   *BRJ was a correspondent for 2 years before it was finally
    integrated into Mazars*

Mazars integrated Ugandan audit and advisory firm BRJ Partners on 1
January 2018. Mazars announced the integration with BRJ partners in the
annual partners meeting. BRJ was a correspondent for 2 years before it
was finally integrated into Mazars

Zimbabwe
========

-   *In 2016, Mazars signed a correspondent agreement with KLMCA
    Zimbabwe, an audit, tax and advisory firm.*

In 2016, Mazars signed a correspondent agreement with KLMCA Zimbabwe, an
audit, tax and advisory firm.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *website of the Mazars Group, in English and French*

-   *Mazars USA*

website of the Mazars Group, in English and French

Mazars USA
