**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merrick%20Garland\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Merrick Garland
===============

-   *On March 16, 2016, President Barack Obama nominated Garland to
    serve as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court to fill the
    vacancy created by the death of Antonin Scalia.*

-   *Merrick Brian Garland (born November 13, 1952) is an American
    lawyer and jurist who serves as the Chief United States Circuit
    Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
    Columbia Circuit.*

Merrick Brian Garland (born November 13, 1952) is an American lawyer and
jurist who serves as the Chief United States Circuit Judge of the United
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. He has
served on that court since 1997.

A native of the Chicago area, Garland attended Harvard University for
his undergraduate and legal education. After serving as a law clerk to
Judge Henry J. Friendly of the United States Court of Appeals for the
Second Circuit and Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. of the Supreme Court
of the United States, he practiced corporate litigation at Arnold &
Porter and worked as a federal prosecutor in the United States
Department of Justice, where he played a leading role in the
investigation and prosecution of the Oklahoma City bombers.

On March 16, 2016, President Barack Obama nominated Garland to serve as
an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court to fill the vacancy created by
the death of Antonin Scalia. The Senate refused to hold a hearing or
vote on this nomination made during the last year of Obama's presidency,
with the Republican majority insisting that the next elected President
should fill the vacancy. Senate Republicans' unprecedented refusal to
consider the nomination was highly controversial. Garland's nomination
lasted 293 days and expired on January 3, 2017, at the end of the 114th
Congress.

Early life and education
========================

-   *Born to a Jewish family, Garland was raised in Conservative
    Judaism.*

-   *Merrick Brian Garland was born on November 13, 1952, in Chicago,
    Illinois.*

-   *Circuit, Mikva would rely on Garland when selecting clerks.*

-   *Garland then attended Harvard Law School, graduating with a J.D.*

-   *Following graduation, Garland served as a law clerk for Judge
    Henry J.*

Merrick Brian Garland was born on November 13, 1952, in Chicago,
Illinois. He was raised in the northern suburb of Lincolnwood in the
Chicago area. His mother Shirley (née Horwitz) was a director of
volunteer services at Chicago's Council for Jewish Elderly (now called
CJE SeniorLife); his father, Cyril Garland, headed Garland Advertising,
a small business run out of the family's home. Born to a Jewish family,
Garland was raised in Conservative Judaism. His grandparents left the
Russian Empire (then the Pale of Settlement) in the early 20th century,
fleeing antisemitic pogroms and seeking a better life for their children
in the United States.

Garland attended Niles West High School in Skokie, Illinois, where he
was president of the student council, acted in theatrical productions,
and was a member of the debate team. He graduated in 1970 as the class
valedictorian. Garland was also a Presidential Scholar and National
Merit Scholar.

Garland attended Harvard College on a scholarship, graduating as
valedictorian with a A.B. degree summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa in
social studies in 1974. He initially wanted to become a physician, but
quickly decided to become a lawyer instead. Garland allied himself with
his future boss, Jamie Gorelick, when he was elected the only freshman
on a campus-wide committee. During his college summers Garland
volunteered as Congressman Abner J. Mikva's speechwriter. After
President Carter appointed Mikva to the D.C. Circuit, Mikva would rely
on Garland when selecting clerks. At Harvard, Garland wrote news
articles and theater reviews for the Harvard Crimson and worked as a
Quincy House tutor. Garland wrote his 235-page honors thesis on
industrial mergers in Britain in the 1960s.

Garland then attended Harvard Law School, graduating with a J.D. magna
cum laude in 1977. During law school, Garland was a member of the
Harvard Law Review, serving as an articles editor from 1976 to 1977. As
an articles editor, Garland assigned himself to edit a submission by
Justice William Joseph Brennan Jr. on the topic of the role of state
constitutions in safeguarding individual rights. Garland's
correspondence with Brennan ultimately helped him win a clerkship with
the justice. Garland ran for president of the Review, but lost to Susan
Estrich.

Following graduation, Garland served as a law clerk for Judge Henry J.
Friendly of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit from 1977 to
1978, and then Justice Brennan of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1978 to
1979.

Department of Justice and private practice
==========================================

-   *Garland was special assistant to Attorney General Benjamin
    Civiletti from 1979 to 1981.*

-   *Garland then briefly returned to Arnold & Porter, working there
    from 1992 to 1993.*

-   *In 1985-86, while at Arnold & Porter, Garland was a lecturer in law
    at Harvard Law School, where he taught antitrust law.*

-   *Garland won praise for his work on the case from the Republican
    Governor of Oklahoma, Frank Keating.*

Garland was special assistant to Attorney General Benjamin Civiletti
from 1979 to 1981. After the Carter administration ended in 1981,
Garland joined the law firm Arnold & Porter as an associate, and was a
partner at the firm from 1985 to 1989. While at Arnold & Porter, the
white shoe firm founded by Justice Abe Fortas, Garland mostly practiced
corporate litigation. In Motor Vehicles Manufacturers Ass'n v. State
Farm Mutual Automobile Insurance Co. (1983) Garland acted as counsel to
an insurance company suing to reinstate an unpopular automatic seat belt
mandate.\
After winning the case in both the D.C. Circuit and the Supreme Court,\
Garland would write an eighty-seven page Harvard Law Review article
describing the way courts use a heightened "hard look" standard of
review and scope of review when an agency chooses deregulation, with
increasing focus on the fidelity of the agencies' actions to
congressional intent.\
In 1985-86, while at Arnold & Porter, Garland was a lecturer in law at
Harvard Law School, where he taught antitrust law. He has also published
an article in the Yale Law Journal urging a broader application of
antitrust immunity to state and local governments.

In 1989, desiring to return to public service and do more trial work,
Garland became an Assistant United States Attorney in the U.S.
Attorney's Office for the District of Columbia. As a line prosecutor,
Garland represented the government in criminal cases ranging from drug
trafficking to complex public corruption matters. Garland was one of
three principal prosecutors who handled the investigation into
Washington, D.C. mayor Marion Barry's possession of cocaine.

Garland then briefly returned to Arnold & Porter, working there from
1992 to 1993. In 1993, Garland joined the new Clinton administration as
deputy assistant attorney general in the Criminal Division of the United
States Department of Justice. The following year, then-Deputy Attorney
General Jamie Gorelick—a key mentor of Garland's—asked Garland to be her
principal deputy associate attorney general.

In that role, Garland's responsibilities included the supervision of
high-profile domestic-terrorism cases, including the Oklahoma City
bombing, Ted Kaczynski (also known as the "Unabomber"), and the Atlanta
Olympics bombings.

Garland insisted on being sent to Oklahoma City in the aftermath of that
attack to examine the crime scene and oversee the investigation in
preparation for the prosecution. He represented the government at the
preliminary hearings of the two main defendants, Timothy McVeigh and
Terry Nichols. Garland offered to lead the trial team, but could not
because he was needed at the Justice Department headquarters. Instead,
he helped pick the team and supervised it from Washington, where he was
involved in major decisions, including the choice to seek the death
penalty for McVeigh and Nichols. Garland won praise for his work on the
case from the Republican Governor of Oklahoma, Frank Keating.

D.C. Circuit
============

Appointment
===========

-   *Garland's confirmation vote came to the floor of the
    Republican-controlled Senate on March 19, 1997.*

-   *Garland became Chief Judge of the D.C.*

-   *As chief judge, Garland announced in May 2013 that the D.C.*

-   *Justice Brennan, for whom Garland clerked, recommended Garland for
    the position in a letter to Clinton.*

On September 6, 1995, President Bill Clinton nominated Garland to the
U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia seat vacated by his
longtime mentor Abner J. Mikva. Justice Brennan, for whom Garland
clerked, recommended Garland for the position in a letter to Clinton.
The American Bar Association (ABA) Standing Committee on the Federal
Judiciary unanimously gave Garland a "well-qualified" committee rating,
its highest.

On December 1, 1995, Garland received a hearing before the Senate
Judiciary Committee. In Senate confirmation hearings Garland said that
the Supreme Court justices whom he most admired were Justice Brennan,
for whom he clerked, and Chief Justice John Marshall. Garland also
expressed admiration for the writing style of Justice Oliver Wendell
Holmes, Jr.. Senate Republicans did not then schedule a vote on
Garland's confirmation, not because of concerns over Garland's
qualifications but because of a dispute over whether to fill the seat.

After winning the November 1996 presidential election, Clinton
renominated Garland on January 7, 1997. Garland's confirmation vote came
to the floor of the Republican-controlled Senate on March 19, 1997. He
was confirmed in a 76–23 vote and received his judicial commission the
next day. The majority of Republican senators voted to confirm Garland,
including Senators John McCain, Orrin Hatch, Susan Collins, and Jim
Inhofe. Senators Mitch McConnell, Chuck Grassley, and Jeff Sessions were
among those who voted against Garland. All of the 23 "no" votes came
from Republicans, and all were based "on whether there was even a need
for an eleventh seat" on the D.C. Circuit.

Garland became Chief Judge of the D.C. Circuit on February 12, 2013. As
chief judge, Garland announced in May 2013 that the D.C. Circuit had
unanimously decided to provide the public with same-day audio recordings
of oral arguments in the court.

Notable cases
=============

-   *As of 2016, Garland had only written fifteen dissents in his two
    decades on the court, fewer than his colleague Judge Brett
    Kavanaugh, who wrote some 17 dissents over the previous decade.*

-   *Garland has a reputation for collegiality, and his opinions rarely
    draw a dissent.*

-   *Garland is considered a judicial moderate and a centrist.*

Garland is considered a judicial moderate and a centrist. Garland has
been described by Nina Totenberg and Carrie Johnson of NPR as "a
moderate liberal, with a definite pro-prosecution bent in criminal
cases". Tom Goldstein, the publisher of SCOTUSblog, wrote in 2010 that
"Judge Garland's record demonstrates that he is essentially the model,
neutral judge. He is acknowledged by all to be brilliant. His opinions
avoid unnecessary, sweeping pronouncements." Garland has a reputation
for collegiality, and his opinions rarely draw a dissent. As of 2016,
Garland had only written fifteen dissents in his two decades on the
court, fewer than his colleague Judge Brett Kavanaugh, who wrote some 17
dissents over the previous decade.

Administrative and environmental law
====================================

-   *Garland has tended to favor deference to regulatory agencies.*

-   *For example, in In re Aiken County (2013), Garland dissented when
    the court issued mandamus ordering the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
    to process the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository license.*

-   *In Americans for Safe Access v. Drug Enforcement Administration
    (2013), Garland joined a divided court upholding the DEA's
    classification of marijuana as a Schedule I drug.*

Garland has tended to favor deference to regulatory agencies. For
example, in In re Aiken County (2013), Garland dissented when the court
issued mandamus ordering the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to process
the Yucca Mountain nuclear waste repository license. In Americans for
Safe Access v. Drug Enforcement Administration (2013), Garland joined a
divided court upholding the DEA's classification of marijuana as a
Schedule I drug. However, according to Goldstein, in a number of split
decisions on environmental law Garland "favored contested EPA
regulations and actions when challenged by industry, and in other cases
he has accepted challenges brought by environmental groups." In Rancho
Viejo, LLC v. Norton (2003), Garland found the arroyo toad was protected
by the federal Endangered Species Act. Then-Circuit Judge John Roberts
dissented from the denial of rehearing en banc, writing that Congress's
interstate commerce power cannot reach "a hapless toad that, for reasons
of its own, lives its entire life in California."

Criminal law and whistleblower protection
=========================================

-   *For example, in United States v. Watson (1999), Garland dissented
    when the court concluded a prosecutor's closing argument was unduly
    prejudicial, objecting that a conviction should only be reversed for
    "the most egregious of these kind of errors."*

-   *Roberts replied, "Any time Judge Garland disagrees, you know you're
    in a difficult area."*

-   *In 2007, Garland dissented when the en banc D.C.*

While on the bench, Garland has shown a tendency to be deferential to
the government in criminal cases, siding with prosecutors in ten of the
fourteen criminal cases in which he disagreed with a colleague. For
example, in United States v. Watson (1999), Garland dissented when the
court concluded a prosecutor's closing argument was unduly prejudicial,
objecting that a conviction should only be reversed for "the most
egregious of these kind of errors." In 2007, Garland dissented when the
en banc D.C. Circuit reversed the conviction of a Washington, D.C.
police officer who had accepted bribes in an FBI sting operation.

Garland has taken a broad view of whistleblower protection laws, such as
the False Claims Act (FCA), which creates a private cause of action
against those defrauding the federal government. For example, in United
States ex rel. Yesudian v. Howard University (1998), Garland wrote for
the court in holding that a plaintiff alleging he had been fired by
Howard University for whistleblowing could sue under the FCA for
retaliation. In United States ex rel. Totten v. Bombardier Corp. (2004),
Garland dissented when the court, in an opinion written by then-Judge
John Roberts, held that the FCA did not apply to false claims submitted
to Amtrak because Amtrak is not the government. Roberts justified his
narrow reading by citing a book by Circuit Judge Henry Friendly. In
dissent, Garland (who like Roberts had clerked for Friendly), cited
Friendly's book as supporting the use of legislative intent, writing
that Roberts was relying on "'canons' of statutory construction, which
serve here as 'cannons' of statutory destruction." Garland's dissent,
expressing concerns that the court's ruling would impede the
government's ability to pursue false claims cases against federal
grantees, is credited with sparking the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery
Act of 2009, which eliminated the loophole. During confirmation hearings
in 2005, Senator Chuck Grassley sharply questioned Roberts on why he
hadn't adopted Garland's reading. Roberts replied, "Any time Judge
Garland disagrees, you know you're in a difficult area."

National security
=================

-   *In al Odah v. United States (2003), a panel that included Garland
    unanimously held that federal courts could not hear challenges from
    Guantanamo detainees.*

-   *During Garland's tenure, the D.C.*

During Garland's tenure, the D.C. Circuit has reviewed cases arising
from the Guantanamo Bay detention camp. In al Odah v. United States
(2003), a panel that included Garland unanimously held that federal
courts could not hear challenges from Guantanamo detainees. In Parhat v.
Gates (2008), Garland wrote for a unanimous panel that overturned the
Combatant Status Review Tribunal's determination that a captured Uyghur
was an enemy combatant. In Saleh v. Titan Corp. (2009), Garland
dissented from the court's holding that former Iraqi detainees at Abu
Ghraib prison could not sue private military contractors who
participated in torture and prisoner abuse. Garland wrote that the suit
should be allowed to proceed because "no act of Congress and no judicial
precedent" immunized the contractors from tort liability, the Federal
Tort Claims Act specifically excludes contractors, and tort liability
would not interfere with government operations.

First Amendment
===============

-   *Professor Rick Hasen, an election-law expert, writes that Garland's
    opinions on election law are characterized by careful application of
    precedent and indicate that Garland believes in reasonable
    regulation.*

-   *Garland has addressed a number of religious freedom cases while on
    the D.C.*

-   *Garland found the regulation to be facially overbroad and not
    narrowly tailored.*

-   *Postal Service (2005), Garland wrote for the court, holding that a
    U.S.*

According to Goldstein, Garland has "tended to take a broader view" of
First Amendment rights compared to other justices on the Court. In cases
involving the Freedom of Information Act and similar provisions related
to government transparency, "Judge Garland's rulings reflect a
preference for open government." In ACLU v. CIA (2013), Garland wrote
for a unanimous panel rejecting the agency's Glomar response and
ordering it to process the ACLU's FOIA request regarding targeted
killings by CIA drones. In Cause of Action v. FTC (2015), Garland wrote
for a unanimous panel overturning the agency's limitation on FOIA fee
waivers to large news outlets.

In Lee v. Department of Justice (2005), Garland dissented from the
denial of rehearing en banc after the D.C. Circuit affirmed the district
court's order holding reporters in contempt of court for refusing to
testify about their anonymous sources during the Wen Ho Lee
investigation. Garland wrote that the panel had erred in failing to
"weigh the public interest in protecting the reporter's sources against
the private interest in compelling disclosure" and that this "undermined
the Founders' intention to protect the press 'so that it could bare the
secrets of government and inform the people.'" In Initiative &
Referendum Institute v. U.S. Postal Service (2005), Garland wrote for
the court, holding that a U.S. Postal Service regulation banning
signature-gathering for petitions at post offices violated the First
Amendment. Garland found the regulation to be facially overbroad and not
narrowly tailored.

In cases involving campaign finance reform laws, Garland has applied
Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission when he believed that he
was compelled to do so, but he has not sought to extend its holding. In
Wagner v. Federal Election Commission (2015), Garland wrote for the
unanimous en banc D.C. Circuit in upholding a prohibition on campaign
contributions from federal contractors because of the governmental
interest in preventing corruption. In National Association of
Manufacturers v. Taylor (2009), Garland wrote for the court in a
decision upholding the constitutionality of lobbyist disclosure
requirements under the Honest Leadership and Open Government Act.
Professor Rick Hasen, an election-law expert, writes that Garland's
opinions on election law are characterized by careful application of
precedent and indicate that Garland believes in reasonable regulation.

Garland has addressed a number of religious freedom cases while on the
D.C. Circuit, although several of these have been decided on procedural
grounds. In 2002, Garland joined a unanimous court in ruling for two
federal prisoners who were denied the right to consume communion wine.
In 2010, Garland wrote the decision for a unanimous court in favor of an
Interior Department employee who brought a religious-discrimination
claim after the Interior Department refused to allow her to work
weekdays rather than Sunday, when she wished to attend church and Bible
study.

Second Amendment
================

-   *In 2007, Garland voted in favor of en banc review of the D.C.*

-   *Goldstein commented, "Garland did not take a formal position on the
    merits of the case" and "even if he had concluded that the statute
    was constitutional, that view of the case would have conformed" to
    widespread views under then-existing Supreme Court precedent.*

In 2007, Garland voted in favor of en banc review of the D.C. Circuit's
panel decision in Parker v. District of Columbia invalidating the D.C.
handgun ban, which the Supreme Court subsequently affirmed 5–4 in an
opinion by Justice Scalia. Goldstein commented, "Garland did not take a
formal position on the merits of the case" and "even if he had concluded
that the statute was constitutional, that view of the case would have
conformed" to widespread views under then-existing Supreme Court
precedent. Trevor Burrus of the Cato Institute nonetheless wrote that
libertarians and conservatives should be concerned about Garland's
stance on gun rights.

Other cases
===========

-   *In Alexander v. Daley (2003), Garland joined a decision (authored
    by Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly), rejecting a challenge brought by
    District of Columbia residents seeking D.C. congressional voting
    rights.*

-   *In Hutchins v. District of Columbia (1999), Garland agreed with
    four other D.C.*

-   *Garland also joined the part of Judge Judith W. Rogers's opinion
    (concurring in part and dissenting in part) holding that a
    fundamental right to intrastate travel exists.*

In Alexander v. Daley (2003), Garland joined a decision (authored by
Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly), rejecting a challenge brought by District
of Columbia residents seeking D.C. congressional voting rights.

In Hutchins v. District of Columbia (1999), Garland agreed with four
other D.C. Circuit judges (en banc) that D.C.'s Juvenile Curfew Act of
1995 implicated at least some significant right of minors. He joined
parts of a plurality opinion written by Judge Laurence Silberman that
upheld the juvenile curfew under intermediate scrutiny and a vagueness
challenge. Garland also joined the part of Judge Judith W. Rogers's
opinion (concurring in part and dissenting in part) holding that a
fundamental right to intrastate travel exists.

Supreme Court nomination
========================

-   *Garland was considered twice to fill vacated seats on the United
    States Supreme Court in 2009 and 2010 before finally being nominated
    in 2016 by President Barack Obama for the seat left vacant by the
    death of conservative Associate Justice Antonin Scalia.*

Garland was considered twice to fill vacated seats on the United States
Supreme Court in 2009 and 2010 before finally being nominated in 2016 by
President Barack Obama for the seat left vacant by the death of
conservative Associate Justice Antonin Scalia.

2009 and 2010 considerations
============================

-   *President Obama interviewed Garland, among others, for the
    vacancy.*

-   *After the April 2010 announcement by Justice John Paul Stevens that
    he would retire, Garland was again widely seen as a leading
    contender for a nomination to the Supreme Court of the United
    States.*

-   *In May 2010, Senator Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, said he would
    help Obama if Garland was nominated, calling Garland "a consensus
    nominee" and predicting that Garland would win Senate confirmation
    with bipartisan support.*

In 2009, following the announcement by Justice David Souter that he
would retire, Garland was considered as one of nine finalists for the
post, which ultimately went to Sonia Sotomayor, then a judge of the
Second Circuit.

After the April 2010 announcement by Justice John Paul Stevens that he
would retire, Garland was again widely seen as a leading contender for a
nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States. President Obama
interviewed Garland, among others, for the vacancy. In May 2010, Senator
Orrin Hatch, Republican of Utah, said he would help Obama if Garland was
nominated, calling Garland "a consensus nominee" and predicting that
Garland would win Senate confirmation with bipartisan support. Obama
nominated Solicitor General of the United States Elena Kagan, who was
confirmed in August 2010.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.4816666666666665in" height="5.5in"}\
*Garland with Barack Obama at his Supreme Court nomination, 2016*

Scalia vacancy and 2016 nomination
==================================

-   *Five days later, on March 16, Obama formally nominated Garland to
    the then vacant post of Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of
    the United States.*

-   *In early March 2016, The New York Times reported that Garland was
    being vetted by the Obama Administration as a potential nominee.*

-   *Garland had more federal judicial experience than any Supreme Court
    nominee in history, and was the oldest Supreme Court nominee since
    Lewis F. Powell, Jr. in 1971.*

On February 13, 2016, Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia died. Later
that day, Senate Republicans led by Majority Leader Mitch McConnell
issued a statement that they would not consider any nominee put forth by
Obama, and that a Supreme Court nomination should be left to the next
President of the United States. President Obama responded that he
intended to "fulfill my constitutional duty to appoint a judge to our
highest court," and that there was no "well established tradition" that
a president could not fill a Supreme Court vacancy during the U.S.
President's last year in office.

In early March 2016, The New York Times reported that Garland was being
vetted by the Obama Administration as a potential nominee. A week later,
Garland was named as one of three judges on the President's "short list"
(along with Judge Sri Srinivasan, also of the D.C. Circuit, and Judge
Paul J. Watford of the Ninth Circuit). Obama interviewed all three
leading contenders, as well as two others who were being considered:
Judge Jane L. Kelly of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
and Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson of the U.S. District Court for the
District of Columbia. Soon afterward, Senator Orrin Hatch, President pro
tempore of the United States Senate and the most senior Republican
Senator, predicted that President Obama would "name someone the liberal
Democratic base wants" even though he "could easily name Merrick
Garland, who is a fine man." Five days later, on March 16, Obama
formally nominated Garland to the then vacant post of Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court of the United States.

In an unprecedented move, Senate Republicans (under Senate Majority
Leader Mitch McConnell) refused to consider Garland's nomination,
holding "no hearings, no votes, no action whatsoever" on the nomination.
The refusal was highly controversial, with some commentators saying the
seat on the Court to which Garland was nominated was "stolen". Over
170,000 people signed a White House petition asking President Obama to
independently appoint Garland to the Supreme Court, arguing that the
Senate had waived its advise and consent role. On November 17, U.S.
District Judge Rudolph Contreras threw out a lawsuit against Senator
McConnell seeking to compel a vote on the nomination, finding that the
plaintiff, who had simply alleged he was a voter, had no standing to
sue.

Garland had more federal judicial experience than any Supreme Court
nominee in history, and was the oldest Supreme Court nominee since Lewis
F. Powell, Jr. in 1971. The American Bar Association (ABA) Standing
Committee on the Federal Judiciary unanimously rated Garland
"well-qualified" (the Committee's highest rating) to sit on the Supreme
Court.

After a period of 293 days, Garland's nomination expired on January 3,
2017 at the end of the 114th Congress. On January 31, 2017, President
Donald Trump nominated Neil Gorsuch to fill the Court vacancy.

Memberships and committee service
=================================

-   *Garland served as co-chair of the administrative law section of the
    District of Columbia Bar from 1991 to 1994.*

-   *In 2003, Garland was elected to the Harvard Board of Overseers,
    completing the unexpired term of Deval Patrick, who had stepped down
    from the board.*

-   *Garland served as president of the overseers for 2009–10.*

Garland served as co-chair of the administrative law section of the
District of Columbia Bar from 1991 to 1994. He is also a member of the
American Law Institute.

In 2003, Garland was elected to the Harvard Board of Overseers,
completing the unexpired term of Deval Patrick, who had stepped down
from the board. Garland served as president of the overseers for
2009–10.

Personal life
=============

-   *Lynn Garland's grandfather, Samuel Irving Rosenman, was a justice
    of the New York Supreme Court (a trial-level court) and a special
    counsel to Presidents Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman.*

-   *Garland and his wife, Lynn, have been married since 1987.*

-   *Garland is a resident of Bethesda, Maryland.*

-   *Financial disclosure forms in 2016 indicated that Garland's net
    worth at the time was between \$6 million and \$23 million.*

Garland and his wife, Lynn, have been married since 1987. Lynn Garland's
grandfather, Samuel Irving Rosenman, was a justice of the New York
Supreme Court (a trial-level court) and a special counsel to Presidents
Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman. Garland and his wife have two
daughters, Rebecca and Jessica; both are graduates of Yale University.
He is a second cousin of six-term Iowa Governor Terry Branstad.

Garland is a resident of Bethesda, Maryland. Financial disclosure forms
in 2016 indicated that Garland's net worth at the time was between \$6
million and \$23 million. Garland is partially colorblind so he uses a
list to match his suits and ties.

Selected publications
=====================

-   *Student Note, Commercial Speech, Supreme Court, 1975 Term, 90
    Harv.*

-   *Merrick B. Garland, Antitrust and State Action: Economic Efficiency
    and the Political Process, 96 Yale L.J.*

-   *James F. Fitzpatrick & Merrick Garland, The Court, 'Veto' and
    Airbags, The New York Times, August 20, 1983, at 21.*

Merrick B. Garland, Antitrust and State Action: Economic Efficiency and
the Political Process, 96 Yale L.J. 486 (1987) doi:10.2307/1340869.

———, Antitrust and Federalism: A Response to Professor Wiley, 96 Yale
L.J. 1291 (1987) doi:10.2307/796386.

———, Deregulation and Judicial Review, 98 Harv. L. Rev. 505 (1985)
doi:10.2307/796502.

———, Courts Give Deregulatory Policies New Hard Look, Legal Times, April
22, 1985.

——— & Robert Pitofsky, Federal Trade Commission Investigations, 4
Antitrust Counseling and Litigation Techniques, Ch. 48 (J.O. Kalinowski
ed. 1984).

James F. Fitzpatrick & Merrick Garland, The Court, 'Veto' and Airbags,
The New York Times, August 20, 1983, at 21.

Student Note, Commercial Speech, Supreme Court, 1975 Term, 90 Harv. L.
Rev. 142 (1976).

Student Note, State Action Exemption and Antitrust Enforcement Under the
Federal Trade Commission Act, 89 Harv. L. Rev. 715 (1976)
doi:10.2307/1340219.

Student Writer, The Harvard Crimson, 1972-73.

See also
========

-   *List of nominations to the Supreme Court of the United States*

-   *Barack Obama Supreme Court candidates*

-   *List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States*

Barack Obama Supreme Court candidates

Barack Obama judicial appointment controversies

List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States

List of nominations to the Supreme Court of the United States

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *Congressional Research Service Report R44479, Judge Merrick
    Garland: His Jurisprudence and Potential Impact on the Supreme
    Court, coordinated by Kate M. Manuel, Brandon J. Murrill, and Andrew
    Nolan (2016)*

-   *United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary Questionnaire for
    Judicial Nominees for Merrick Garland (2016).*

United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary Questionnaire for
Judicial Nominees for Merrick Garland (2016).

Congressional Research Service Report R44479, Judge Merrick Garland: His
Jurisprudence and Potential Impact on the Supreme Court, coordinated by
Kate M. Manuel, Brandon J. Murrill, and Andrew Nolan (2016)

Congressional Research Service Report R44484, Majority, Concurring, and
Dissenting Opinions Authored by Judge Merrick Garland, coordinated by R.
Chuck Mason (2016).

Congressional Research Service Legal Sidebar WSLG1526, Vacancy on the
Supreme Court: CRS Products, by Kate M. Manuel and Andrew Nolan (2016).

Robin Bradley Kar & Jason Mazzone, The Garland Affair: What History and
the Constitution Really Say About President Obama's Powers to Appoint a
Replacement for Justice Scalia, NYU Law Review, Vol. 91, p. 53 (2016)

External links
==============

-   *Merrick Garland at the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges, a
    public domain publication of the Federal Judicial Center.*

-   *Selected Resources on Merrick B. Garland at the Law Library of
    Congress*

-   *March 16, 2016.*

-   *Meet Merrick Garland, President Obama's Supreme Court Nominee.*

Merrick Garland at the Biographical Directory of Federal Judges, a
public domain publication of the Federal Judicial Center.

Selected Resources on Merrick B. Garland at the Law Library of Congress

Appearances on C-SPAN

Meet Merrick Garland, President Obama's Supreme Court Nominee. The White
House. March 16, 2016.
