**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michael%20Oreskes\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Michael Oreskes
===============

-   *Michael Oreskes (born May 26, 1954) is an American journalist who
    worked at the New York Daily News and for 20 years at The New York
    Times.*

-   *Oreskes was then vice president and senior managing editor at the
    Associated Press before joining NPR as senior vice president of news
    and editorial director in 2015.*

-   *Oreskes was ousted in 2017 amid allegations of sexual harassment.*

Michael Oreskes (born May 26, 1954) is an American journalist who worked
at the New York Daily News and for 20 years at The New York Times.
Oreskes was then vice president and senior managing editor at the
Associated Press before joining NPR as senior vice president of news and
editorial director in 2015. Oreskes was ousted in 2017 amid allegations
of sexual harassment.

Early life and education
========================

-   *He has three siblings: Naomi Oreskes, a historian of science;
    Daniel Oreskes, an actor; and Rebecca Oreskes, a writer and former
    U.S. Forest Service ranger.*

-   *Oreskes graduated from Stuyvesant High School.*

-   *Oreskes was born to Susan and Irwin Oreskes.*

Oreskes was born to Susan and Irwin Oreskes. His father was a professor
of medical laboratory sciences and former dean of the School of Health
Sciences at Hunter College, City University of New York; his mother was
a teacher. He has three siblings: Naomi Oreskes, a historian of science;
Daniel Oreskes, an actor; and Rebecca Oreskes, a writer and former U.S.
Forest Service ranger.

Oreskes graduated from Stuyvesant High School. He earned his Bachelor of
Arts from the City College of New York in 1975. While at CCNY, he wrote
for the student newspaper, The Campus.

Journalism career
=================

-   *Oreskes remained at the Times until 2005, serving at various times
    as Chief Political Correspondent, Metropolitan Editor, City Editor,
    Washington Bureau Chief, and from 2001 to 2005 as Deputy Managing
    Editor/Assistant Managing Editor.*

-   *From 2005 to 2008, Oreskes was executive editor of the
    International Herald Tribune.*

-   *Oreskes covered City Hall at the New York Daily News before joining
    the New York Times in 1981.*

Oreskes covered City Hall at the New York Daily News before joining the
New York Times in 1981. In 1988, he won the Silurians Award for News
Analyses for his presidential campaign coverage. Oreskes remained at the
Times until 2005, serving at various times as Chief Political
Correspondent, Metropolitan Editor, City Editor, Washington Bureau
Chief, and from 2001 to 2005 as Deputy Managing Editor/Assistant
Managing Editor.

From 2005 to 2008, Oreskes was executive editor of the International
Herald Tribune. He then joined the Associated Press, spending seven
years there before joining NPR in 2015.

Oreskes received three Emmy Awards and an Alfred I. duPont–Columbia
University Award for documentary television production. In 1999, he was
awarded the Townsend Harris Medal by CCNY, and in 2000 he was inducted
into the CCNY Communications Alumni Hall of Fame. He is co-author, with
Eric Lane, of The Genius of America, How the Constitution Saved Our
Country and Why It Can Again (2007).

In 2018, former Fox News executive Ken LaCorte recruited Oreskes and
former Fox News executive editor John Moody to launch LaCorte News, "a
digital news startup with the stated goal of restoring faith in media."

Sexual harassment allegations
=============================

-   *In October 2017, three women accused Oreskes of sexual harassment.*

-   *The Post later reported that NPR ignored multiple sexual abuse
    allegations against Oreskes for two years, and that NPR's handling
    of Oreskes had prompted a "virtual rebellion" among staffers.*

-   *Two of the alleged incidents occurred in the 1990s while Oreskes
    was working as the Washington, D.C., bureau chief for The New York
    Times, and one occurred in 2015 while he was employed by NPR.*

In October 2017, three women accused Oreskes of sexual harassment. Two
of the alleged incidents occurred in the 1990s while Oreskes was working
as the Washington, D.C., bureau chief for The New York Times, and one
occurred in 2015 while he was employed by NPR. He was accused of
forcibly kissing the two women during his Times tenure, and asking
invasive and sexual questions during a three-hour lunch during the NPR
meeting, pursuing one through a personals advertisement. When confronted
by one of the women about kissing her and putting his tongue in her
mouth, he was said to have responded, "I was overcome with passion. I
couldn’t help myself.” He was reprimanded privately by NPR management.

On October 31, 2017, following a Washington Post article on the
allegations of misconduct at the Times, Oreskes was put on indefinite
leave. NPR's chief executive Jarl Mohn said that action was taken
because of a previously unpublicized allegation of harassment concerning
a current employee. Oreskes resigned the next day at Mohn's request,
writing, “I am deeply sorry to the people I hurt. My behavior was wrong
and inexcusable, and I accept full responsibility." He was discharged
without severance or separation benefits, and reimbursed NPR \$1,800 in
expense account charges related to his meetings with women.

The Post later reported that NPR ignored multiple sexual abuse
allegations against Oreskes for two years, and that NPR's handling of
Oreskes had prompted a "virtual rebellion" among staffers. Staffers told
CNN's Brian Stelter that Oreskes created an oppressive atmosphere by
abusing his position to meet young women. Mohn conceded he failed to act
fast enough. A report by the law firm Morgan Lewis discussed Oreskes's
pursuit of dates using NPR-financed meals, that some women warned
younger women not to be alone with him, and staff distrust of management
to address problems such as Oreskes's behavior; the report offered
recommendations. Other women Oreskes allegedly harassed later surfaced.
Mohn later apologized in a note to NPR staff, saying that he had failed
to "see the bigger pattern of poor judgment and unacceptable behavior."
More than 100 Associated Press staffers signed a petition demanding that
management "take active steps to seek out anyone who was subjected to
inappropriate behavior by Oreskes during his tenure with the company."

Keith Woods, NPR's vice president for newsroom training and diversity,
said revelations of sexual harassment by Oreskes resulted in a
“months-long organizational trauma.” David Folkenflik and Mary Louise
Kelly, both of NPR, received the 2018 Ethics in Journalism Awards from
the Society of Professional Journalists for their reporting on the
Oreskes scandal within their own organization.

Personal life
=============

-   *In 1989, Oreskes married journalist Geraldine Baum, then a reporter
    for Newsday.*

-   *Their son, Ben Oreskes, a journalist, has worked for Politico and
    Los Angeles Times.*

In 1989, Oreskes married journalist Geraldine Baum, then a reporter for
Newsday. Their son, Ben Oreskes, a journalist, has worked for Politico
and Los Angeles Times.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Appearances on C-SPAN*

Appearances on C-SPAN
