**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Miles%20Poindexter\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Miles Poindexter
================

-   *Poindexter also served as United States Ambassador to Peru during
    the presidential administrations of Warren Harding and Calvin
    Coolidge.*

-   *In 1908, Poindexter was elected to the U.S. House.*

-   *As a Republican and later a Progressive, he served as a United
    States Representative and United States Senator from the state of
    Washington.*

Miles Poindexter (April 22, 1868 – September 21, 1946) was an American
politician and author. As a Republican and later a Progressive, he
served as a United States Representative and United States Senator from
the state of Washington. Poindexter also served as United States
Ambassador to Peru during the presidential administrations of Warren
Harding and Calvin Coolidge.

A native of Memphis, Tennessee, Poindexter was raised in Virginia,
received a law degree from Washington and Lee University in 1891 and
moved to Walla Walla, Washington, where he practiced law and entered
politics as a Republican. He served as prosecuting attorney in Walla
Walla, and then moved to Spokane, where he was assistant prosecuting
attorney and a superior court judge.

In 1908, Poindexter was elected to the U.S. House. He served one term
(1909-1911), and was reelected in 1910. He resigned before his new term
began in March 1911 because the state legislature elected him to the
U.S. Senate. He was reelected in 1916, and served from 1911 to 1923.
Poindexter became a Progressive Party member in 1913, but returned to
the Republicans in 1915. Poindexter was an unsuccessful candidate for
the Republican nomination for president in 1920, and for reelection to
the Senate in 1922. In 1923, Poindexter was appointed Ambassador to
Peru. He served until 1928, when he returned to Washington and waged an
unsuccessful campaign for the Senate.

After losing the 1928 election, Poindexter moved to Natural Bridge
Station, Virginia. He died there in 1946, and was buried at Fairmount
Memorial Park in Spokane.

Early life
==========

-   *Poindexter was born in Memphis, Tennessee, the son of Josephine
    (Anderson) Poindexter and William B. Poindexter.*

Poindexter was born in Memphis, Tennessee, the son of Josephine
(Anderson) Poindexter and William B. Poindexter. His parents were
residents of Malvern Hill in Henrico County, Virginia, and his father
was an American Civil War veteran of the Confederate States Army.
Poindexter was raised in Virginia, and attended the Fancy Hill Academy
in Rockbridge County, Virginia. He then attended Washington and Lee
University in Lexington, Virginia, from which he graduated with an LL.B.
degree in 1891.

Legal career
============

-   *After he graduated, he settled in Walla Walla, Washington, where he
    was admitted to the bar and began the practice of law.*

-   *He moved to Spokane, Washington in 1897 where he continued the
    practice of law.*

-   *He served as the assistant prosecuting attorney for Spokane County
    from 1898 to 1904, and as a judge of the superior court from 1904
    to 1908.*

-   *In 1892 he became the prosecuting attorney of Walla Walla County.*

After he graduated, he settled in Walla Walla, Washington, where he was
admitted to the bar and began the practice of law. In 1892 he became the
prosecuting attorney of Walla Walla County. He moved to Spokane,
Washington in 1897 where he continued the practice of law. He served as
the assistant prosecuting attorney for Spokane County from 1898 to 1904,
and as a judge of the superior court from 1904 to 1908.

Political life
==============

-   *Poindexter left the Republican Party in 1913 to join the
    Progressive Party, rejoining the Republicans in 1915.*

-   *He was elected as a Republican to the Sixty-first Congress, and
    served from March 4, 1909 to March 3, 1911 representing Washington's
    newly created 3rd congressional district.*

-   *He was reelected in 1916, and served from March 4, 1911 to March
    3, 1923.*

He was elected as a Republican to the Sixty-first Congress, and served
from March 4, 1909 to March 3, 1911 representing Washington's newly
created 3rd congressional district. He was reelected in 1910, but
resigned in 1911 because the Washington State Legislature elected him to
the U.S. Senate. He was reelected in 1916, and served from March 4, 1911
to March 3, 1923. Poindexter left the Republican Party in 1913 to join
the Progressive Party, rejoining the Republicans in 1915. He was
unsuccessful in his candidacy for reelection in 1922.

Committee chairmanships
=======================

-   *United States Senate Committee on Mines and Mining (Sixty-second
    Congress, Sixty-sixth Congress and Sixty-seventh Congress)*

-   *United States Senate Committee on Expenditures in the War
    Department (Sixty-third Congress and Sixty-fourth Congress)*

-   *United States Senate Committee on Indian Depredations (Sixty-fifth
    Congress)*

During his Senate tenure, Poindexter served as chairman of the following
committees:

United States Senate Committee on Expenditures in the Interior
Department (Sixty-second Congress)

United States Senate Committee on Mines and Mining (Sixty-second
Congress, Sixty-sixth Congress and Sixty-seventh Congress)

United States Senate Committee on Pacific Islands and Puerto Rico
(Sixty-second Congress)

United States Senate Committee on Expenditures in the War Department
(Sixty-third Congress and Sixty-fourth Congress)

United States Senate Committee on Indian Depredations (Sixty-fifth
Congress)

Later life
==========

-   *He was an unsuccessful candidate that year for the United States
    Senate.*

-   *After losing his 1922 campaign for reelection to the Senate, in
    1923 Harding appointed Poindexter as United States Ambassador to
    Peru.*

-   *Poindexter ran in the 1920 Republican Party presidential primaries,
    but was not a serious contender for the party's nomination.*

Poindexter ran in the 1920 Republican Party presidential primaries, but
was not a serious contender for the party's nomination. He received the
votes of 20 delegates on the first ballot at the 1920 Republican
National Convention, and the nomination went to Warren G. Harding on the
10th ballot. After losing his 1922 campaign for reelection to the
Senate, in 1923 Harding appointed Poindexter as United States Ambassador
to Peru. He served until 1928, when he resigned and returned to
Washington. He was an unsuccessful candidate that year for the United
States Senate.

Retirement and death
====================

-   *After the death of his wife, Poindexter returned to his home, "Elk
    Cliff" in Greenlee, near Natural Bridge Station, Virginia.*

-   *He died there on September 21, 1946, and was buried at Fairmount
    Memorial Park in Spokane.*

After the death of his wife, Poindexter returned to his home, "Elk
Cliff" in Greenlee, near Natural Bridge Station, Virginia. He died there
on September 21, 1946, and was buried at Fairmount Memorial Park in
Spokane.

Family
======

-   *In 1892, Poindexter married Elizabeth Gale Page (1866-1929) of
    Walla Walla.*

-   *They were the parents of a son, Gale Aylett Poindexter
    (1893-1976).*

-   *She and Miles Poindexter were the aunt and uncle of actress Gale
    Page.*

In 1892, Poindexter married Elizabeth Gale Page (1866-1929) of Walla
Walla. They were the parents of a son, Gale Aylett Poindexter
(1893-1976).

Poindexter remarried in 1936, becoming the husband of Elinor Jackson
Junkin Latane, the widow of John Holladay Latane, a professor at Johns
Hopkins University.

Elizabeth Gale Page was the granddaughter of Joseph Gale, the first
governor of Oregon. She and Miles Poindexter were the aunt and uncle of
actress Gale Page.

References
==========

Sources
=======

Books
=====

-   *Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774-2005.*

-   *Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.*

-   *History of the City of Spokane and Spokane County, Washington.*

-   *U.S. Congress (2005).*

Durham, Nelson Wayne (1912). History of the City of Spokane and Spokane
County, Washington. II. Spokane, WA: S. J. Clarke Publishing
Company..mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}

Langland, James (1921). The Chicago Daily News Almanac and Year Book for
1921. Chicago, IL: Chicago Daily News Company.

U.S. Congress (2005). Biographical Directory of the United States
Congress, 1774-2005. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
ISBN 978-0-16-073176-1.

Newspapers
==========

-   *"Miles Poindexter, Ex-Senator, Weds".*

"Miles Poindexter, Ex-Senator, Weds". Oakland Tribune. Oakland, CA.
Associated Press. August 27, 1936 – via Newspapers.com.

Niemeyer, H. H. (November 23, 1938). "Singer Without a Song". St. Louis
Post-Dispatch. St. Louis, MO – via Newspapers.com.

Internet
========

-   *Washington Secretary of State (August 1, 2016).*

-   *"Biographical Note, Miles Poindexter".*

-   *Miles Poindexter Photograph Collection, 1880s-1940s.*

-   *"Burial Record, Miles Poindexter".*

-   *Seattle, WA: University of Washington.*

Washington Secretary of State (August 1, 2016). "Burial Record, Miles
Poindexter". Cemetery Records: Fairmount Memorial Park. Olympia, WA:
Washington State Archives. Retrieved February 8, 2018.

Special Collections, University of Washington Libraries (2006).
"Biographical Note, Miles Poindexter". Miles Poindexter Photograph
Collection, 1880s-1940s. Seattle, WA: University of Washington.
Retrieved February 8, 2018.

External sources
================

-   *United States Congress.*

-   *Miles Poindexter at Find a Grave*

-   *Biographical Directory of the United States Congress.*

-   *"Miles Poindexter (id: P000403)".*

United States Congress. "Miles Poindexter (id: P000403)". Biographical
Directory of the United States Congress.

Miles Poindexter at Find a Grave

Archives
========

-   *Miles Poindexter Papers.*

-   *Miles Poindexter photograph collection.*

Miles Poindexter Papers. 1897-1940. 189.79 cubic feet (442 boxes).

Miles Poindexter photograph collection. circa 1910-1920. .12 cubic feet
(4 folders). 162 photographic prints.

Thomas Burke papers. 1875-1925. 24.78 cubic feet (58 boxes).

Austin E. Griffiths papers. 1891-1952. 11.73 cubic feet (25 boxes). 1
microfilm reel.
