**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mountain\_Mayhem\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Mountain Mayhem
===============

-   *Mountain Mayhem is a 24-hour mountain bike race held in the UK.*

Mountain Mayhem is a 24-hour mountain bike race held in the UK. It has
been held annually since 1998 and usually occurs on the weekend nearest
to midsummer. In 2013 the event moved to Gatcombe Park in
Gloucestershire.

History
=======

Levels of competition
=====================

-   *The latest race, in 2009, had the following levels of competition:*

-   *The race has always had categories for teams in men/women/mixed.*

The race has always had categories for teams in men/women/mixed. A solo
category was introduced in 2000, with eight invited solo racers in 2000
and increasing numbers of solo entries each following year. The latest
race, in 2009, had the following levels of competition:

Individual Male\
Individual Female\
Mixed Expert\
Mixed\
Open Men\
Open Women\
Sport Men\
Sport Women\
Tens

and the following subcategories:

Guests\
Services\
Singlespeed\
University\
Veteran

Venues
======

-   *In 2004 the race moved to the Deer Park of Eastnor Castle in
    Herefordshire where the course used a 9-mile loop.*

-   *In 1999 the race moved to Sandwell Park Farm in the Sandwell Valley
    Country Park, West Midlands.*

-   *In 2009 the race saw an estimated crowd of 15,000 spectators.*

-   *The first Mountain Mayhem took place in 1998 at Trentham Gardens,
    Staffordshire.*

The first Mountain Mayhem took place in 1998 at Trentham Gardens,
Staffordshire.

In 1999 the race moved to Sandwell Park Farm in the Sandwell Valley
Country Park, West Midlands.

In 2004 the race moved to the Deer Park of Eastnor Castle in
Herefordshire where the course used a 9-mile loop. In 2009 the race saw
an estimated crowd of 15,000 spectators.

For 2013 it moved to a new location less than 40 miles from Eastnor on
private land which has never been used for cycling before, Gatcombe Park
in Gloucestershire.

Sponsors
========

-   *For 2008 it was sponsored by Giant*

-   *Between 2009 and 2011 it was sponsored by Original Source, a PZ
    Cussons brand.*

-   *Between 2003 and 2006 it was sponsored by Saab and Salomon.*

-   *For 2007 it was sponsored by Giant and T-Mobile.*

-   *Between 1998 and 2002 it was sponsored by Red Bull.*

Between 1998 and 2002 it was sponsored by Red Bull.

Between 2003 and 2006 it was sponsored by Saab and Salomon.

For 2007 it was sponsored by Giant and T-Mobile.

For 2008 it was sponsored by Giant

Between 2009 and 2011 it was sponsored by Original Source, a PZ Cussons
brand.

Between 2012 and 2014 it was sponsored by Wiggle (an online cycle shop
based in the UK)

In 2015 it was sponsored by Go Outdoors (a camping and outdoor sports
chain)

Weather
=======

-   *For 2009 the weather was wet on Friday, but dried up for the start
    of the race on Saturday.*

-   *In 2011 the race started in damp conditions but as the event
    unfolded the conditions improved giving perfect conditions for
    mountain bike racing.*

-   *From the first event in 1998 the race suffered from very heavy rain
    and the course became very wet and slippery.*

The race has recently had a reputation for wet weather (sharing similar
weather to the Glastonbury Festival which it often coincides with).

From the first event in 1998 the race suffered from very heavy rain and
the course became very wet and slippery. Many of the subsequent years
were also wet although most of them didn't experience rain on both days
of the event.

The run up to the 2003 event was characterized by very dry conditions
and the race was held in record temperatures leading to fears about
dehydration for riders and warnings to teams to ensure riders drank
enough water.

The move in 2004 to the Malverns (and its heavy clay soil) was
accompanied by heavy rain throughout the race with many riders
abandoning the race due to the adverse conditions and leaving many
riders questioning the choice of the new venue.

Questions over the venue remained at the start of the following years
race, which started in heavy rain with fears of a repeated "mudfest",
however despite heavy rain at the start of the race continuing into the
evening the rain cleared overnight to provide a dry and sunny end to the
race.

2006 provided a break for rain- and mud-weary riders with dry and hot
conditions throughout the weekend. The Eastnor Castle course, which in
the previous years rain had clogged bikes and caused wheels to slide and
slip, was suddenly fast and dusty providing very competitive and
enjoyable racing conditions.

Both 2007 and 2008 however saw a return to the rain and heavy mud with
the 2008 summer being the "wettest summer on record" provided
particularly atrocious conditions in heavy downpours of rain.

For 2009 the weather was wet on Friday, but dried up for the start of
the race on Saturday.

In 2010 the weather was dry and sunny for the whole event. Dust and
sunburn were the main risks to the riders.

In 2011 the race started in damp conditions but as the event unfolded
the conditions improved giving perfect conditions for mountain bike
racing.

In the run up to the 2012 event, southern England suffered from
exceptionally heavy rain fall that saturated the ground. From Friday
onwards the whole event was plagued by torrential downpours and strong
winds. Consequently, most of the track, the main arena and the campsite
deteriorated into the notorious "mudfest". Given the conditions, the
organizers declared that each team member only needed to complete a
minimum of 1 lap to qualify for a placing (normally a minimum of 2 laps
are required) and that teams retiring early (i.e. before the full 24
hours had elapsed) would be placed according to the number of laps.

Participation
=============

-   *The 2009 race saw an estimated 2,500 riders.*

-   *This race is open to all who wish to ride to in it, subject to
    available space.*

This race is open to all who wish to ride to in it, subject to available
space. The 2009 race saw an estimated 2,500 riders. According to Pat
Adams, the organizer of the event,

Competitors may enter individually or in teams of four, five, or ten.
Registration fees are £200 for small teams, £265 for a ten-person team,
and £265 for individuals.

See also
========

-   *24 hour mountain bike races*

-   *Mountain bike racing*

Mountain bike racing

24 hour mountain bike races

Sleepless in the Saddle

24 Hours of Adrenalin

External links
==============

Official Website
================

-   *GO Outdoors Mountain Mayhem*

GO Outdoors Mountain Mayhem

Live Reports
============

-   *On One Bikes reports from Mountain Mayhem 2010*

On One Bikes reports from Mountain Mayhem 2010

Results
=======

-   *2009 Results*

2003 Results

2004 Results

2005 Results

2006 Results

2009 Results

References
==========

-   *Coordinates: 52°02′17″N 2°22′41″W﻿ / ﻿52.038°N 2.378°W﻿ / 52.038;
    -2.378*

Coordinates: 52°02′17″N 2°22′41″W﻿ / ﻿52.038°N 2.378°W﻿ / 52.038; -2.378
