**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Next%20Space%20Technologies%20for%20Exploration%20Partnerships\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships
====================================================

-   *Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships (NextSTEP) is
    a NASA program using a public-private partnership model that seeks
    commercial development of deep space exploration capabilities to
    support more extensive human space flight missions in the Proving
    Ground around and beyond cislunar space—the space near Earth that
    extends just beyond the moon.*

Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships (NextSTEP) is a
NASA program using a public-private partnership model that seeks
commercial development of deep space exploration capabilities to support
more extensive human space flight missions in the Proving Ground around
and beyond cislunar space—the space near Earth that extends just beyond
the moon.

Program overview
================

-   *A key component of the NextSTEP partnership model is that it
    provides an opportunity for NASA and industry to partner to develop
    capabilities that meet NASA human space exploration objectives while
    also supporting industry commercialization plans.*

-   *NASA hopes to incorporate modules and parts developed in the
    NextSTEP project into the follow on Deep Space Gateway and Deep
    Space Transport projects.*

NextSTEP is a public-private partnership model that seeks commercial
development of deep space exploration capabilities to support more
extensive human space flight missions in the Proving Ground around and
beyond cislunar space—the space near Earth that extends just beyond the
moon.

NASA issued the original NextSTEP Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) to
U.S. industry in late 2014, and issued the second NextSTEP BAA in April
2016.

An important part of NASA's strategy is to stimulate the commercial
space industry to help the agency achieve its strategic goals and
objectives for expanding the frontiers of knowledge, capability, and
opportunities in space. A key component of the NextSTEP partnership
model is that it provides an opportunity for NASA and industry to
partner to develop capabilities that meet NASA human space exploration
objectives while also supporting industry commercialization plans.

NASA hopes to incorporate modules and parts developed in the NextSTEP
project into the follow on Deep Space Gateway and Deep Space Transport
projects.

Phases
======

NextSTEP (first selection)
==========================

-   *Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International of Windsor Locks,
    Connecticut*

-   *Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company of Denver, Colorado*

-   *CubeSat selections addressed NASA's strategic knowledge gaps
    reducing risk, increasing effectiveness, and improving the design of
    robotic and human space exploration.*

In April 2015 the first NextSTEP selection by NASA selected 12
Partnerships to advance concept studies and technology development
projects in the areas of advanced propulsion, habitation and small
satellites.

Selected advanced electric propulsion projects developed propulsion
technology systems in the 50- to 300-kilowatt range to meet the needs of
a variety of deep space mission concepts. The three NextSTEP advanced
propulsion projects, \$400,000 to \$3.5 million per year per award, were
limited to a three-year performance period focused on ground testing
efforts. The selected companies were:

Ad Astra Rocket Company of Webster, Texas

Aerojet Rocketdyne of Redmond, Washington

MSNW of Redmond, Washington

These selections were intended to augment the Orion capsule with the
development of capabilities to initially sustain a crew of four for up
to 60 days in cis-lunar space with the ability to scale up to transit
habitation capabilities for future Mars missions. The selected projects
addressed concepts and, in some cases, provide advancement in
technologies related to habitation and operations, or environmental
control and life support capabilities of a habitation system. The seven
NextSTEP habitat projects had initial performance periods of up to 12
months, at a value of \$400,000 to \$1 million for the study and
development efforts, with the potential for follow-on phases to be
defined during the initial phase. The selected companies were:

Bigelow Aerospace LLC of North Las Vegas, Nevada

The Boeing Company of Pasadena, Texas

Dynetics Inc. of Huntsville, Alabama

Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International of Windsor Locks,
Connecticut

Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company of Denver, Colorado

Orbital ATK of Dulles, Virginia

Orbital Technologies Corporation of Madison, Wisconsin

The CubeSat projects selected in the award were expected to fly as
secondary payload missions on the first flight of the Space Launch
System, Exploration Mission-1 (EM-1). CubeSat selections addressed
NASA's strategic knowledge gaps reducing risk, increasing effectiveness,
and improving the design of robotic and human space exploration.

The two NextSTEP CubeSat projects had fixed-price contracts with
technical and payment milestones and total values for the entire
development and operations of \$1.4 to \$7.9 million per award. The
selected companies were:

Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company of Denver, Colorado

Morehead State University of Morehead, Kentucky

NextSTEP activities were executed through fixed-price contracts with
milestone payments, combined with corporate-resource contributions. The
selected partner provided overall study and technology development
efforts, benefiting NASA and future commercial endeavors.

NextSTEP-2
==========

![](media/image1.png){width="5.5in" height="3.09375in"}\
*The galley in a space station*

Habitation systems
==================

-   *Starting in September 2016 under NextSTEP-2 Appendix A six
    companies were given approximately 24 months to develop ground
    prototypes or conduct concept studies for a Deep Space Habitat.*

-   *The selected companies were:*

-   *In August 2016 NASA estimated the combined total of all the awards,
    covering work in 2016 and 2017, would be approximately \$65 million,
    with additional efforts and funding continuing into 2018.*

-   *Sierra Nevada Corporation's Space Systems of Louisville, Colorado*

Starting in September 2016 under NextSTEP-2 Appendix A six companies
were given approximately 24 months to develop ground prototypes or
conduct concept studies for a Deep Space Habitat. Habitation systems
provide a safe place for humans to live as humans move beyond Earth,
especially in the context of the Journey to Mars.\
The selected companies were:

Bigelow Aerospace of Las Vegas

Boeing of Pasadena, Texas

Lockheed Martin of Denver

Orbital ATK of Dulles, Virginia

Sierra Nevada Corporation's Space Systems of Louisville, Colorado

NanoRacks of Webster, Texas

In August 2016 NASA estimated the combined total of all the awards,
covering work in 2016 and 2017, would be approximately \$65 million,
with additional efforts and funding continuing into 2018. Partners were
required to contribute at least 30 percent of the cost of the overall
proposed effort.

In January 2018 Sierra Nevada Corporation (SNC) was granted a contract
modification permitting the development of advanced bio-based life
support and food production systems at SNC's Madison, Wisconsin offices.
The aim is to produce plant-based modules that can recycle drinking
water from waste water streams, regenerate oxygen from carbon dioxide,
produce fresh food for astronauts, and support radiation protection of
the crew while on deep exploration missions, such as missions to
Mars.\[citation needed\]

ISRU, FabLab
============

-   *The machines will perform space based on-demand fabrication.*

-   *The proposals for development of a first-generation, in-space,
    multi-material fabrication laboratory (FabLab) for space missions
    were solicited in May 2017 under Appendix B of the NextSTEP-2 Broad
    Agency Announcement.*

-   *In December 2017 NASA issued several sets of announcements,
    contracts and Space Act Agreements (SAA).*

In December 2017 NASA issued several sets of announcements, contracts
and Space Act Agreements (SAA).

In the first NASA issued a broad agency announcement (BAA) requesting
"proposals for trade studies and design, fabrication, and testing of
critical components and subsystems for acquisition and processing of
extraterrestrial resources into water, oxygen, and fuel." NASA expects
to issue multiple fixed price contracts for small amounts in phased
approaches for up to 5 years. Cost sharing and/or investment matching
will be required.

In the second a total of \$10.2 million was awarded over 18 months for
development of prototype equipment for use in its FabLab. The machines
will perform space based on-demand fabrication. The proposals for
development of a first-generation, in-space, multi-material fabrication
laboratory (FabLab) for space missions were solicited in May 2017 under
Appendix B of the NextSTEP-2 Broad Agency Announcement.\
The 3 award winners were:

Interlog Corporation of Anaheim, California

Techshot Inc. of Greeneville, Indiana

Tethers Unlimited Inc. of Bothell

Human landing systems (moon)
============================

-   *In December 2018 NASA announced that it was issuing a formal
    request for proposals as Appendix E of NextSTEP-2 allowing American
    companies to submit bids for the design and development of new
    reusable systems allowing astronauts to land on the lunar surface.*

-   *Feb. 14, 2019 - NASA hosted an Industry Forum at NASA HQ to provide
    an overview of the Human Landing System (HLS) BAA.*

In December 2018 NASA announced that it was issuing a formal request for
proposals as Appendix E of NextSTEP-2 allowing American companies to
submit bids for the design and development of new reusable systems
allowing astronauts to land on the lunar surface. Feb. 14, 2019 - NASA
hosted an Industry Forum at NASA HQ to provide an overview of the Human
Landing System (HLS) BAA.

In April 2019 NASA announced a formal request for proposals for Appendix
H of NextSTEP-2 allowing American companies to submit bids for the
design and development of the Ascent Element of the Human Landing System
(HLS) including the cabin used during landings. Solicitation Number:
NNH19ZCQ001K\_APP-H. This was later extended to cover the entire lander
- descent element, ascent element and transfer vehicle.

NextSTEP-3
==========

-   *Phase 3 ends with Deployment and Operational Status of Deep Space
    Habitation and Habitation Systems.*

Phase 3 ends with Deployment and Operational Status of Deep Space
Habitation and Habitation Systems.

Deep Space Transport
====================

-   *It is a follow on project using some of the hardware, software and
    systems developed by NextSTEP.*

This project is to develop a vehicle with crewed solar electric
propulsion and able to fly to Mars orbit. It is a follow on project
using some of the hardware, software and systems developed by NextSTEP.
It is currently in the initial planning stage.

Progress
========

-   *By August 2016, the first phase of NextSTEP had been completed and
    negotiations with the companies for NextSTEP-2 agreements were
    started.*

-   *In March 2017, the proposed development of the Deep Space Transport
    vehicle was announced.*

-   *In March 2019 NASA announced that NextSTEP-2 ground prototypes have
    been delivered to several of its sites for testing.*

By August 2016, the first phase of NextSTEP had been completed and
negotiations with the companies for NextSTEP-2 agreements were started.
In March 2017, the proposed development of the Deep Space Transport
vehicle was announced.

In August 2017 the Ad Astra Rocket Company reported completing its Year
2 milestones for the VASIMR electric plasma rocket engine. NASA gave
approval for Ad Astra to proceed with Year 3 after reviewing completion
of a 10-hour cumulative test of the 200SS™ rocket at 100 kW.

In March 2019 NASA announced that NextSTEP-2 ground prototypes have been
delivered to several of its sites for testing. The prototypes are full
size. The fittings include environmental control and life support
systems, avionics, sleeping quarters, exercise equipment, and communal
areas.

Funding summary
===============

-   *The funding of all Exploration partners for each phase of the
    NextSTEP program is as follows*

The funding of all Exploration partners for each phase of the NextSTEP
program is as follows

See also
========

-   *Deep Space Transport*

-   *Deep Space Gateway*

-   *International Space Station*

-   *Deep Space Habitat*

Commercial Orbital Transportation Services

Commercial Resupply Services

Commercial Crew Development

Deep Space Habitat

Deep Space Transport

Deep Space Gateway

International Space Station

Notes
=====

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *NASA NextSTEP webpage*

NASA NextSTEP webpage
