**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NOAA-B\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

NOAA-B
======

-   *NOAA-B was a spacecraft in the TIROS-N series launched by NASA on
    29 May 1980.*

-   *Intended for a Sun-synchronous orbit, the spacecraft entered a
    lower, elliptical orbit due to a launch vehicle malfunction
    resulting in a failed mission.*

-   *Had the launch been successful it would have been designated
    NOAA-7.*

NOAA-B was a spacecraft in the TIROS-N series launched by NASA on 29 May
1980. Intended for a Sun-synchronous orbit, the spacecraft entered a
lower, elliptical orbit due to a launch vehicle malfunction resulting in
a failed mission. Had the launch been successful it would have been
designated NOAA-7.

Science objectives
==================

-   *Observation of atmospheric water/temperature profile.*

-   *Day and night observation of global cloud cover.*

-   *Monitoring particle flux in the near-Earth environment.*

Day and night observation of global cloud cover.

Observation of atmospheric water/temperature profile.

Monitoring particle flux in the near-Earth environment.

Launch failure
==============

-   *Unlike the earlier Nimbus 1, which was also launched into an
    unplanned elliptical orbit following a launch vehicle malfunction,
    no attempt appears to have been made to operate the spacecraft
    instrumentation during its remaining lifetime in orbit.*

-   *This resulted in the satellite attempting to separate from the
    launch vehicle at approximately 370 seconds after launch.*

-   *Due to requirements specific to TIROS missions, there was no
    interface between the satellite and the launch vehicle guidance
    systems.*

Following launch a fuel leak between the turbopump and gearbox caused
the main engine to lose 20–25% of its thrust. This caused the guidance
system of the Atlas launch vehicle to increase the length of the first
stage burn to compensate.

Due to requirements specific to TIROS missions, there was no interface
between the satellite and the launch vehicle guidance systems. This
resulted in the satellite attempting to separate from the launch vehicle
at approximately 370 seconds after launch. The separation failed due to
recontact between the Atlas - which was still under thrust - and the
satellite, which only separated when the solid-fuel rocket motor
intended to place NOAA-B into a circular 830 km (450 nmi)
sun-synchronous orbit fired.

Because the satellite had been unable to perform the pitch-down maneuver
necessary to reach its intended orbit the spacecraft ended up in a
highly elliptical orbit that was unsuitable for the intended mission.
Following unsuccessful attempts to correct the orbit using the
satellite's attitude control thrusters, NASA pronounced the mission a
failure.

Unlike the earlier Nimbus 1, which was also launched into an unplanned
elliptical orbit following a launch vehicle malfunction, no attempt
appears to have been made to operate the spacecraft instrumentation
during its remaining lifetime in orbit.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *"Prelaunch summary: NOAA-B launch" (PDF).*

-   *Retrieved 1 January 2013.*

"Prelaunch summary: NOAA-B launch" (PDF). NASA. 13 May 1980. Retrieved 1
January 2013.
