**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NPR\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

NPR
===

-   *NPR manages the Public Radio Satellite System, which distributes
    NPR programs and other programming from independent producers and
    networks such as American Public Media and Public Radio
    International.*

-   *Individual public radio stations are not required to broadcast all
    NPR programs; most broadcast a mix of NPR programs, content from
    American Public Media, Public Radio International, Public Radio
    Exchange and WNYC Studios, and locally produced programs.*

National Public Radio (NPR, stylized as npr) is an American privately
and publicly funded non-profit membership media organization based in
Washington, D.C. NPR differs from other non-profit membership media
organizations, such as AP, in that it was established by an act of
Congress and most of its member stations are owned by government
entities (often public universities). It serves as a national syndicator
to a network of over 1,000 public radio stations in the United States.

NPR produces and distributes news and cultural programming. Individual
public radio stations are not required to broadcast all NPR programs;
most broadcast a mix of NPR programs, content from American Public
Media, Public Radio International, Public Radio Exchange and WNYC
Studios, and locally produced programs. The organisation's flagship
shows are two drive-time news broadcasts, Morning Edition and the
afternoon All Things Considered; both are carried by most NPR member
stations, and are among the most popular radio programs in the country.
As of March 2018\[update\], the drive time programs attract an audience
of 14.9 million and 14.7 million respectively.

NPR manages the Public Radio Satellite System, which distributes NPR
programs and other programming from independent producers and networks
such as American Public Media and Public Radio International. Its
content is also available on-demand online, on mobile networks, and, in
many cases, as podcasts.

Name
====

-   *The organization's legal name is National Public Radio and its
    trademarked brand is NPR; it is known by both names.*

-   *In June 2010, the organization announced that it was "making a
    conscious effort to consistently refer to ourselves as NPR on-air
    and online" because NPR is the common name for the organization and
    the tag line "This ... is NPR" has been used by its radio hosts for
    many years.*

The organization's legal name is National Public Radio and its
trademarked brand is NPR; it is known by both names. In June 2010, the
organization announced that it was "making a conscious effort to
consistently refer to ourselves as NPR on-air and online" because NPR is
the common name for the organization and the tag line "This ... is NPR"
has been used by its radio hosts for many years. However, National
Public Radio remains the legal name of the group, as it has been since
1970.

History
=======

1970s
=====

-   *This act was signed into law by 36th President Lyndon B. Johnson,
    and established the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which also
    created the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) for television in
    addition to NPR.*

-   *National Public Radio replaced the National Educational Radio
    Network on February 26, 1970, following Congressional passage of the
    Public Broadcasting Act of 1967.*

-   *NPR was primarily a production and distribution organization until
    1977, when it merged with the Association of Public Radio Stations.*

National Public Radio replaced the National Educational Radio Network on
February 26, 1970, following Congressional passage of the Public
Broadcasting Act of 1967. This act was signed into law by 36th President
Lyndon B. Johnson, and established the Corporation for Public
Broadcasting, which also created the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS)
for television in addition to NPR. A CPB organizing committee under John
Witherspoon first created a board of directors chaired by Bernard Mayes.

The board then hired Donald Quayle to be the first president of NPR with
30 employees and 90 charter member local stations, and studios in
Washington, D.C.

NPR aired its first broadcast on April 20, 1971, covering United States
Senate hearings on the ongoing Vietnam War in Southeast Asia. The
afternoon drive-time newscast All Things Considered premiered on May 3,
1971, first hosted by Robert Conley. NPR was primarily a production and
distribution organization until 1977, when it merged with the
Association of Public Radio Stations. Morning Edition premiered on
November 5, 1979, first hosted by Bob Edwards.

1980s
=====

-   *It took NPR approximately three years to pay off the debt.*

-   *After a Congressional investigation and the resignation of NPR's
    then-president Frank Mankiewicz, the Corporation for Public
    Broadcasting agreed to lend the network money in order to stave off
    bankruptcy.*

-   *NPR also agreed to turn its satellite service into a cooperative
    venture (the Public Radio Satellite System), making it possible for
    non-NPR shows to get national distribution.*

NPR suffered an almost-fatal setback in 1983 when efforts to expand
services created a deficit of nearly \$7 million (equivalent to \$18
million in 2018 dollars). After a Congressional investigation and the
resignation of NPR's then-president Frank Mankiewicz, the Corporation
for Public Broadcasting agreed to lend the network money in order to
stave off bankruptcy. In exchange, NPR agreed to a new arrangement
whereby the annual CPB stipend that it had previously received directly
would be divided among local stations instead; in turn, those stations
would support NPR productions on a subscription basis. NPR also agreed
to turn its satellite service into a cooperative venture (the Public
Radio Satellite System), making it possible for non-NPR shows to get
national distribution. It took NPR approximately three years to pay off
the debt.

1990s
=====

-   *Delano Lewis, the president of C&P Telephone, left that position to
    become NPR's CEO and president in January 1994.*

-   *In November 1998, NPR's board of directors hired Kevin Klose, the
    director of the International Broadcasting Bureau, as its president
    and chief executive officer.*

Delano Lewis, the president of C&P Telephone, left that position to
become NPR's CEO and president in January 1994. Lewis resigned in August
1998. In November 1998, NPR's board of directors hired Kevin Klose, the
director of the International Broadcasting Bureau, as its president and
chief executive officer.

2000s
=====

-   *By November of that year, users downloaded NPR and other public
    radio podcasts 5 million times.*

-   *In March 2008, the NPR Board announced that Stern would be stepping
    down from his role as chief executive officer, following conflict
    with NPR's board of directors "over the direction of the
    organization" (including issues NPR's member station managers had
    had with NPR's expansion into new media "at the expense of serving"
    the stations that financially support NPR).*

-   *In August 2005, NPR entered podcasting with a directory of over 170
    programs created by NPR and member stations.*

NPR spent nearly \$13 million to acquire and equip a West Coast
25,000-square-foot (2,300Â m2) production facility, NPR West, which
opened in Culver City, Los Angeles County, California, in November 2002.
With room for up to 90 employees, it was established to expand its
production capabilities, improve its coverage of the western United
States, and create a backup production facility capable of keeping NPR
on the air in the event of a catastrophe in Washington, D.C.

In November 2003, NPR received \$235 million from the estate of the late
Joan B. Kroc, the widow of Ray Kroc, founder of McDonald's Corporation.
This was the largest monetary gift ever to a cultural institution.

In 2004 NPR's budget increased by over 50% to \$153 million due to the
Kroc gift. \$34 million of the money was deposited in its endowment. The
endowment fund before the gift totaled \$35 million. NPR will use the
interest from the bequest to expand its news staff and reduce some
member stations' fees. The 2005 budget was about \$120 million.

In August 2005, NPR entered podcasting with a directory of over 170
programs created by NPR and member stations. By November of that year,
users downloaded NPR and other public radio podcasts 5 million times.
Ten years later, by March 2015, users downloaded podcasts produced only
by NPR 94 million times, and NPR podcasts like Fresh Air and TED Radio
Hour routinely made the iTunes Top Podcasts list.

Ken Stern became chief executive in September 2006, reportedly as the
"hand-picked successor" of CEO Kevin Klose, who gave up the job but
remained as NPR's president; Stern had worked with Klose at Radio Free
Europe.

On December 10, 2008, NPR announced that it would reduce its workforce
by 7% and cancel the news programs Day to Day and News & Notes. The
organization indicated this was in response to a rapid drop in corporate
underwriting in the wake of the economic crisis of 2008.

In the fall of 2008, NPR programming reached a record 27.5 million
people weekly, according to Arbitron ratings figures. NPR stations reach
32.7 million listeners overall.

In March 2008, the NPR Board announced that Stern would be stepping down
from his role as chief executive officer, following conflict with NPR's
board of directors "over the direction of the organization" (including
issues NPR's member station managers had had with NPR's expansion into
new media "at the expense of serving" the stations that financially
support NPR).

As of 2009, corporate sponsorship made up 26% of the NPR budget.

2010s
=====

-   *In October 2010, NPR accepted a \$1.8 million grant from the Open
    Society Institute.*

-   *The grant is meant to begin a project called Impact of Government
    that was intended to add at least 100 journalists at NPR member
    radio stations in all 50 states by 2013.*

-   *In June 2013 NPR canceled the weekday call-in show Talk of the
    Nation.*

In October 2010, NPR accepted a \$1.8 million grant from the Open
Society Institute. The grant is meant to begin a project called Impact
of Government that was intended to add at least 100 journalists at NPR
member radio stations in all 50 states by 2013. The OSI has made
previous donations, but does not take on air credit for its gifts.

In April 2013, NPR moved from its home of 19 years (635 Massachusetts
Avenue NW) to new offices and production facilities at 1111 North
Capitol Street NE in a building adapted from the former C&P Telephone
Warehouse and Repair Facility. The new headquartersâat the corner of
North Capitol Street NE and L Street NWâis in the burgeoning NoMa
neighborhood of Washington. The first show scheduled to be broadcast
from the new studios was Weekend Edition Saturday. Morning Edition was
the last show to move to the new location. In June 2013 NPR canceled the
weekday call-in show Talk of the Nation.

In September 2013, certain of NPR's 840 full- and part-time employees
were offered a voluntary buyout plan, with the goal of reducing staff by
10 percent and returning NPR to a balanced budget by the 2015 fiscal
year.

In December 2018, The Washington Post reported that between 20 and 22
percent of NPR staff was classified as temps, while this compares to
about five percent of a typical for-profit television station. Some of
the temporary staff member told the newspaper the systems was
"exploitative", but NPR's president of operations said the current
systems was in place because the station "media company that strives to
be innovative and nimble."

In December 2018, NPR launched a new podcast analytics technology called
Remote Audio Data (RAD), which developer Stacey Goers described as a
"method for sharing listening metrics from podcast applications straight
back to publishers, with extreme care and respect for user privacy."

Governance
==========

-   *NPR member station managers*

-   *NPR is a membership organization.*

-   *Chair of the NPR Foundation*

-   *Betsy Gardella, president and CEO, New Hampshire Public Radio*

-   *Mike Crane, director, Wisconsin Public Radio*

-   *President of NPR*

-   *NPR Ombudsman/Public Editor*

NPR is a membership organization. Member stations are required to be
non-commercial or non-commercial educational radio stations; have at
least five full-time professional employees; operate for at least 18
hours per day; and not be designed solely to further a religious
broadcasting philosophy or be used for classroom distance learning
programming. Each member station receives one vote at the annual NPR
board meetingsâexercised by its designated Authorized Station
Representative ("A-Rep").

To oversee the day-to-day operations and prepare its budget, members
elect a board of directors. This board is composed of ten A-Reps, five
members of the general public, and the chair of the NPR Foundation.
Terms are for three years and are staggered such that some stand for
election every year.

As of MarchÂ 2015\[update\], the board of directors of NPR included the
following members:

NPR member station managers

Mike Crane, director, Wisconsin Public Radio

Betsy Gardella, president and CEO, New Hampshire Public Radio

Kit Jensen, chief operating officer WVIZ/PBS & 90.3 WCPN ideastream,
chair of the board

Roger LaMay, general manager, WXPN

Caryn Mathes, president and general manager, KUOW

Greg Petrowich, executive director, WSIU Public Broadcasting

Florence Rogers, president and general manager, Nevada Public Radio

Mike Savage, general manager, WBAA

Kerry Swanson, station manager, Northwest Public Radio

Connie Walker, general manager, WUNC

President of NPR

Jarl Mohn, president and CEO

Chair of the NPR Foundation

Howard Wollner, senior vice president, retired, Starbucks Coffee Company

Public members of the board

Fabiola Arredondo, managing partner, Siempre Holdings

Chris Boskin, media company consultant

Patricia Diaz Dennis, senior vice president and assistant general
counsel, retired, AT&T

Paul G. Haaga, Jr., chairman of the board, retired, Capital Research and
Management Company

John S. Wotowicz, managing partner of Concentric Capital, vice chair of
the board

The original purposes of NPR, as ratified by the board of directors, are
the following:

Provide an identifiable daily product which is consistent and reflects
the highest standards of broadcast journalism.

Provide extended coverage of public events, issues and ideas, and to
acquire and produce special public affairs programs.

Acquire and produce cultural programs which can be scheduled
individually by stations.

Provide access to the intellectual and cultural resources of cities,
universities and rural districts through a system of cooperative program
development with member public radio stations.

Develop and distribute programs for specific groups (adult education,
instruction, modular units for local productions) which may meet needs
of individual regions or groups, but may not have general national
relevance.

Establish liaison with foreign broadcasters for a program exchange
service.

Produce materials specifically intended to develop the art and technical
potential of radio

NPR Ombudsman/Public Editor

Elizabeth Jensen

The Ombudsman/Public Editor responds to significant listener queries,
comments and criticisms. The position reports to the president and CEO
Jarl Mohn.\
Elizabeth Jensen was appointed to a three-year term in January 2015.

Funding
=======

-   *This funding amounts to approximately 2% of NPR's overall
    revenues.*

-   *According to CPB, in 2009 11.3% of the aggregate revenues of all
    public radio broadcasting stations were funded from federal sources,
    principally through CPB; in 2012 10.9% of the revenues for Public
    Radio came from federal sources.*

-   *In 2014, NPR CEO Jarl Mohn said the network would begin to increase
    revenue by having brands NPR views as more relevant to the audience
    underwrite NPR programs and requesting higher rates from them.*

In 2010, NPR revenues totaled \$180 million, with the bulk of revenues
coming from programming fees, grants from foundations or business
entities, contributions and sponsorships. According to the 2009
financial statement, about 50% of NPR revenues come from the fees it
charges member stations for programming and distribution charges.
Typically, NPR member stations receive funds through on-air pledge
drives, corporate underwriting, state and local governments, educational
institutions, and the federally funded Corporation for Public
Broadcasting (CPB). In 2009, member stations derived 6% of their revenue
from federal, state and local government funding, 10% of their revenue
from CPB grants, and 14% of their revenue from universities. While NPR
does not receive any direct federal funding, it does receive a small
number of competitive grants from CPB and federal agencies like the
Department of Education and the Department of Commerce. This funding
amounts to approximately 2% of NPR's overall revenues.

During the 1970s and early 1980s, the majority of NPR funding came from
the federal government. Steps were taken during the 1980s to completely
wean NPR from government support, but the 1983 funding crisis forced the
network to make immediate changes. According to CPB, in 2009 11.3% of
the aggregate revenues of all public radio broadcasting stations were
funded from federal sources, principally through CPB; in 2012 10.9% of
the revenues for Public Radio came from federal sources.

In 2011, NPR announced the roll-out of their own online advertising
network, which allows member stations to run geographically targeted
advertisement spots from national sponsors that may otherwise be
unavailable to their local area, opening additional revenue streams to
the broadcaster.

2013 saw the launch of Center Stage, a mix of native advertising and
banner ad featured prominently on the NPR homepage, above-the-fold. The
launch partner for Center Stage was Squarespace.

In 2014, NPR CEO Jarl Mohn said the network would begin to increase
revenue by having brands NPR views as more relevant to the audience
underwrite NPR programs and requesting higher rates from them.

Underwriting spots vs. commercials
==================================

-   *These restrictions apply only to radio broadcasts and not NPR's
    other digital platforms.*

In contrast with commercial broadcasting, NPR's radio broadcasts do not
carry traditional commercials, but has advertising in the form of brief
statements from major sponsors which may include corporate slogans,
descriptions of products and services, contact information such as
website addresses and telephone numbers. These statements are called
underwriting spots and, unlike commercials, are governed by specific FCC
restrictions in addition to truth in advertising laws; they cannot
advocate a product or "promote the goods and services" of for-profit
entities. These restrictions apply only to radio broadcasts and not
NPR's other digital platforms. When questioned on the subject of how
corporate underwriting revenues and foundation grants were holding up
during the recession, in a speech broadcast on C-SPAN before the
National Press Club on March 2, 2009, then president and CEO Vivian
Schiller stated: "underwriting is down, it's down for everybody; this is
the area that is most down for us, in sponsorship, underwriting,
advertising, call it whatever you want; just like it is for all of
media." Hosts of the NPR program Planet Money stated the audience is
indeed a product being sold to advertisers in the same way as commercial
stations, saying: "they are not advertisers exactly but, they have a lot
of the same characteristics; let's just say that."

Audience
========

-   *According to 2015 figures, 87% of the NPR terrestrial public radio
    audience and 67% of the NPR podcast audience is white.*

-   *According to 2009, NPR statistics, about 20.9 million listeners
    tune into NPR each week.*

-   *NPR stations generally subscribe to the Nielsen rating service, but
    are not included in published ratings and rankings such as Radio &
    Records.*

A Harris telephone survey conducted in 2005 found that NPR was the most
trusted news source in the United States.

According to 2009, NPR statistics, about 20.9 million listeners tune
into NPR each week. By 2017, NPR's weekly on-air audience had reached
30.2 million. According to 2015 figures, 87% of the NPR terrestrial
public radio audience and 67% of the NPR podcast audience is white.
According to the 2012 Pew Research Center 2012 News Consumption Survey,
NPR listeners tend to be highly educated, with 54% of regular listeners
being college graduates and 21% having some college. NPR's audience is
almost exactly average in terms of the sex of listeners (49% male, 51%
female). NPR listeners have higher incomes than average (the 2012 Pew
study showed that 43% earn over \$75,000, 27% earn between \$30,000 and
\$75,000). The Pew survey found that the NPR audience tends Democratic
(17% Republican, 37% independent, 43% Democratic) and centrist (21%
conservative, 39% moderate, 36% liberal).

NPR stations generally subscribe to the Nielsen rating service, but are
not included in published ratings and rankings such as Radio & Records.
NPR station listenership is measured by Nielsen in both Diary and PPM
(people meter) markets. NPR stations are frequently not included in
"summary level" diary data used by most advertising agencies for media
planning. Data on NPR listening can be accessed using "respondent level"
diary data. Additionally, all radio stations (public and commercial) are
treated equally within the PPM data sets making NPR station listenership
data much more widely available to the media planning community. NPR's
signature morning news program, Morning Edition, is the network's most
popular program, drawing 14.63 million listeners a week, with its
afternoon newsmagazine, All Things Considered, a close second, with 14.6
million listeners a week according to 2017 Nielsen ratings data.
Arbitron data is also provided by Radio Research Consortium, a
non-profit corporation which subscribes to the Arbitron service and
distributes the data to NPR and other non-commercial stations and on its
website.

Digital media
=============

-   *Of NPR's Twitter followers, the majority (67%) still do listen to
    NPR on the radio.*

-   *By July 2008, Public Interactive had "170 subscribers who
    collectively operate 325 public radio and television stations" and
    clients such as Car Talk, The World, and The Tavis Smiley Show; by
    the end of that month, NPR acquired Public Interactive from PRI In
    March 2011, NPR revealed a restructuring proposal in which
    Boston-based Public Interactive would become NPR Digital Services,
    separate from the Washington D.C.-based NPR Digital Media, which
    focuses on NPR-branded services.*

NPR's history in digital media includes the work of an independent,
for-profit company called Public Interactive, which was founded in 1999
and acquired by PRI in June 2004, when it became a non-profit company.
By July 2008, Public Interactive had "170 subscribers who collectively
operate 325 public radio and television stations" and clients such as
Car Talk, The World, and The Tavis Smiley Show; by the end of that
month, NPR acquired Public Interactive from PRI In March 2011, NPR
revealed a restructuring proposal in which Boston-based Public
Interactive would become NPR Digital Services, separate from the
Washington D.C.-based NPR Digital Media, which focuses on NPR-branded
services. NPR Digital Services would continue offering its services to
public TV stations.

The technical backbone of its digital news publishing system is Core
Publisher, which was built on Drupal, an open-source content management
system.

NPR has been dubbed as "leveraging the Twitter generation" because of
its adaptation of the popular microblogging service as one of its
primary vehicles of information. Of NPR's Twitter followers, the
majority (67%) still do listen to NPR on the radio. In a survey of more
than 10,000 respondents, NPR found that its Twitter followers are
younger, more connected to the social web, and more likely to access
content through digital platforms such as its Peabody Award-winning
website npr.org, as well as podcasts, mobile apps and more. NPR has more
than one Twitter account including @NPR; its survey found that most
respondents followed between two and five NPR accounts, including
topical account, show-specific accounts and on-air staff accounts. In
addition, NPR's Facebook page has been at the forefront of the company
foray into social media. Started by college student and fan Geoff
Campbell in 2008, the page was quickly taken over by the organization,
and over the last two years has grown to nearly 4 million fans and is a
popular example of the company's new focus on a younger audience. NPR
also has a YouTube channel featuring regularly posted videos covering
news and informational subjects.

In May 2018, a group led by NPR acquired the podcasting app Pocket
Casts.

NPR One
=======

-   *In July 2014, NPR launched NPR One, an app for iOS and Android
    smartphones and other mobile devices, which aimed to make it easier
    for listeners to stream local NPR stations live, and listen to NPR
    podcasts by autoplaying content and permitting easy navigation.*

In July 2014, NPR launched NPR One, an app for iOS and Android
smartphones and other mobile devices, which aimed to make it easier for
listeners to stream local NPR stations live, and listen to NPR podcasts
by autoplaying content and permitting easy navigation. Since launch NPR
has made the service available on additional channels: Windows mobile
devices, web browsers, Chromecast, Apple Car Play, Apple Watch, Android
Auto, Android Wear, Samsung Gear S2 and S3, Amazon Fire TV, and Amazon
Alexaâenabled devices.

Programming
===========

Programs produced by NPR
========================

![](media/image1.png){width="5.5in" height="3.735074365704287in"}\
*NPR News logo*

News and public affairs programs
================================

-   *NPR produces a morning and an evening news program, both of which
    also have weekend editions with different hosts.*

-   *All Things Considered, NPR News' evening news program hosted by
    Audie Cornish, Ari Shapiro, Mary Louise Kelly, and Ailsa Chang.*

-   *Morning Edition, NPR News' morning news program hosted by Steve
    Inskeep, Rachel Martin, David Greene, and Noel King.*

NPR produces a morning and an evening news program, both of which also
have weekend editions with different hosts. It also produces hourly
newscasts around the clock.

All Things Considered, NPR News' evening news program hosted by Audie
Cornish, Ari Shapiro, Mary Louise Kelly, and Ailsa Chang.\
Weekend All Things Considered, hosted by Michel Martin

Morning Edition, NPR News' morning news program hosted by Steve Inskeep,
Rachel Martin, David Greene, and Noel King.\
Weekend Edition Saturday, hosted by Scott Simon\
Weekend Edition Sunday, hosted by Lourdes Garcia-Navarro

Here and Now, a news magazine program covering current affairs and
culture hosted by Robin Young and Jeremy Hobson (co-produced with WBUR)

Storytelling and cultural programming
=====================================

-   *TED Radio Hour, hosted by Guy Raz*

Ask Me Another, a trivia quiz hosted by Ophira Eisenberg (co-produced
with WNYC)

Invisibilia, hosted by Alix Spiegel, Hanna Rosin, and Lulu Miller

TED Radio Hour, hosted by Guy Raz

Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me!, a humorous news-based panel show hosted by
Peter Sagal (co-produced with WBEZ)

Podcasts
========

-   *NPR Politics Podcast, a podcast hosted by Tamara Keith and Scott
    Detrow*

All Songs Considered, a music podcast

Alt.Latino, a podcast on Latino arts and culture

Code Switch, a podcast about race and identity hosted by Shereen Marisol
Meraji and Gene Demby

Embedded, a podcast hosted by Kelly McEvers

Hidden Brain, a social sciences podcast hosted by Shankar Vedantam

How I Built This, a podcast on entrepreneurship hosted by Guy Raz

NPR Politics Podcast, a podcast hosted by Tamara Keith and Scott Detrow

Planet Money, a podcast on the economy

Pop Culture Happy Hour, a podcast on culture hosted by Linda Holmes

Up First, a morning news podcast hosted by Steve Inskeep, Rachel Martin,
David Greene, and Noel King.

Music programming
=================

-   *The Thistle & Shamrock, Celtic music hosted by Fiona Ritchie*

-   *Jazz Night In America, hosted by Christian McBride (co-produced
    with WBGO and Jazz at Lincoln Center)*

First Listen, album previews

Jazz Night In America, hosted by Christian McBride (co-produced with
WBGO and Jazz at Lincoln Center)

Songs We Love

The Thistle & Shamrock, Celtic music hosted by Fiona Ritchie

Tiny Desk Concerts, video concert series

Programs distributed by NPR
===========================

News and public affairs
=======================

-   *On Point, public affairs call-in program formerly hosted by Tom
    Ashbrook (WBUR)*

-   *On the Media, media issues hosted by Brooke Gladstone and Bob
    Garfield (WNYC)*

-   *Youth Radio, stories told by youth (self-produced)*

-   *1A, public affairs roundtable program hosted by Joshua Johnson
    (WAMU)*

1A, public affairs roundtable program hosted by Joshua Johnson (WAMU)

Fresh Air, interviews with cultural news-makers hosted by Terry Gross
(WHYY)

Latino USA, Latino issues hosted by Maria Hinojosa (Futuro Media Group)

On Point, public affairs call-in program formerly hosted by Tom Ashbrook
(WBUR)

On the Media, media issues hosted by Brooke Gladstone and Bob Garfield
(WNYC)

Youth Radio, stories told by youth (self-produced)

Storytelling and cultural programming
=====================================

-   *The Big Listen, a radio show about podcasts hosted by Lauren Ober
    (WAMU)*

-   *The Engines of Our Ingenuity is a daily radio series that tells the
    story of human invention and creativity in 3Â½ minute essays.*

-   *Rough Cuts, a podcast and blog encouraging participation in the
    development of other new radio programs*

-   *Radio Ambulante, a Spanish language podcast on Latin American and
    Latino stories hosted by Daniel AlarcÃ³n (self-produced)*

The Big Listen, a radio show about podcasts hosted by Lauren Ober (WAMU)

Bullseye with Jesse Thorn, hosted by Jesse Thorn (Maximum Fun)

Car Talk, humorous automotive advice hosted by Tom Magliozzi and Ray
Magliozzi (WBUR, ending September 2017)

The Engines of Our Ingenuity is a daily radio series that tells the
story of human invention and creativity in 3Â½ minute essays.

Only A Game, sports issues hosted by Bill Littlefield (WBUR)

Radio Ambulante, a Spanish language podcast on Latin American and Latino
stories hosted by Daniel AlarcÃ³n (self-produced)

Rough Cuts, a podcast and blog encouraging participation in the
development of other new radio programs

Says You!, word game show (WGBH)

State of the Re:Union, hosted by Al Letson

StoryCorps, oral history recordings (self-produced)

Music programming
=================

-   *Piano Jazz, hosted by Marian McPartland (South Carolina ETV Radio)*

-   *Mountain Stage, hosted by Larry Groce (West Virginia Public
    Broadcasting)*

From the Top, A program showcasing young classical musicians between the
ages of 8â18 (self-produced)

JazzSet, hosted by Dee Dee Bridgewater (WBGO)

Metropolis, a show on electronic music hosted by Jason Bentley (KCRW)

Mountain Stage, hosted by Larry Groce (West Virginia Public
Broadcasting)

Piano Jazz, hosted by Marian McPartland (South Carolina ETV Radio)

World Cafe, a 2-hour music program featuring both recorded music and
interviews and live in-studio performances, hosted by David Dye, (WXPN)

Public radio programs not affiliated with NPR
=============================================

-   *Many shows produced or distributed by Public Radio
    Internationalâsuch as Living on Earth âare broadcast on public radio
    stations, but are not affiliated with NPR.*

-   *Most public radio stations are NPR member stations and affiliate
    stations of PRI, APM, and PRX at the same time.*

-   *Individual NPR stations can broadcast programming from sources that
    have no formal affiliation with NPR.*

Individual NPR stations can broadcast programming from sources that have
no formal affiliation with NPR. If these programs are distributed by
another distributor, a public radio station must also affiliate with
that network to take that network's programming.

BBC World Service, world news produced by the BBC in the United Kingdom,
distributed by American Public Media. Often used to fill overnight
hours, a low-trafficked period for public radio programming (albeit in
the UK's high-profile morning drive period).

Echoes, a daily program of ambient, new age, and electronic music hosted
by John Diliberto and distributed by Public Radio International

Forum, call-in panel discussion program, wide-ranging national and local
topics hosted by Michael Krasny (KQED-FM).

Hearts of Space, a weekly program of Ambient, Space, and contemplative
music hosted by Stephen Hill, San Rafael, Calif.

Jazz from Lincoln Center, Wynton Marsalis, hosted by Ed Bradley, Murray
Street Productions

Live From Here, produced by American Public Media and hosted by Chris
Thile

The Merrow Report, education issues hosted by John Merrow, Learning
Matters Inc.

The People's Pharmacy, a call-in and interview program on personal
health from WUNC in Chapel Hill, N.C.

Philosophy Talk, everyday topics examined through a philosophical lens,
hosted by Stanford philosophy professors John Perry and Ken Taylor,
produced by Ben Manilla Productions, distributed by Public Radio
Exchange

Planetary Radio, space exploration radio program hosted by Mat Kaplan,
The Planetary Society, Pasadena, Calif.

Pulse of the Planet, a daily two-minute sound portrait of Planet Earth,
hosted by Jim Metzner.

Science Friday, science issues call-in hosted by Ira Flatow and
independently produced, distributed by Public Radio International

Selected Shorts, dramatic readings hosted by Isaiah Sheffer, Symphony
Space, (WNYC) and distributed by Public Radio International

Serial, a podcast exploring a nonfiction story over multiple episodes.
Serial is a spin-off from This American Life.

StarDate, short segments relating to science and astronomy from the
University of Texas at Austin's McDonald Observatory hosted by Sandy
Wood.

Sunday Baroque, baroque and early music hosted by Suzanne Bona (WSHU-FM)

The Takeaway, a daily news program from WNYC distributed by Public Radio
International

This American Life, stories of real life hosted by Ira Glass,
distributed by Public Radio Exchange

A Way with Words, a show about language; distributed by Public Radio
Exchange and Public Radio Satellite System

WireTap, comedy radio program hosted by Jonathan Goldstein of CBC Radio
One and distributed by Public Radio International in the United States.

Wits, a sketch comedy, music, and artist interview program, hosted by
John Moe

Many shows produced or distributed by Public Radio Internationalâsuch as
Living on Earth âare broadcast on public radio stations, but are not
affiliated with NPR. PRI and NPR are separate production and
distribution organizations with distinct missions, and each competes
with the other for programming slots on public radio stations.

Public Radio Exchange also offers a national distribution network where
a significant number of public radio stations go to acquire programs
from independent producers. PRX provides a catalog of thousands of radio
pieces available on-demand as broadcast quality audio files and
available for streaming on the PRX.org website.

Most public radio stations are NPR member stations and affiliate
stations of PRI, APM, and PRX at the same time. The organizations have
different governance structures and missions and relationships with
stations. Other popular shows, like Live from Here (the former A Prairie
Home Companion) and Marketplace, are produced by American Public Media,
the national programming unit of Minnesota Public Radio. These programs
were distributed by Public Radio International prior to APM's founding.
Democracy Now!, the flagship news program of the Pacifica Radio network,
provides a feed to NPR stations, and other Pacifica programs can
occasionally be heard on these stations as well.

Controversies
=============

-   *Over the course of NPR's history, controversies have arisen over
    several incidents and topics.*

Over the course of NPR's history, controversies have arisen over several
incidents and topics.

Allegations of ideological bias
===============================

-   *The NPR ombudsman has described how NPR's coverage of the
    Israel-Palestinian conflict has been simultaneously criticized as
    biased by both sides.*

-   *NPR has also been accused of bias related to specific topics,
    including support of the 2003 Invasion of Iraq and coverage of
    Israel.*

NPR has been accused of displaying both liberal bias, as alleged in work
such as a UCLA and University of Missouri study of Morning Edition, and
conservative bias, including criticism of alleged reliance on
conservative think-tanks. NPR has also been accused of bias related to
specific topics, including support of the 2003 Invasion of Iraq and
coverage of Israel. Their Pentagon reporting has been accused of being
"little more than Pentagon press releases." The NPR ombudsman has
described how NPR's coverage of the Israel-Palestinian conflict has been
simultaneously criticized as biased by both sides. University of Texas
journalism professor and author Robert Jensen has criticized NPR as
taking a pro-war stance during coverage of Iraq war protests.

In 2002 and 2003, surveys and follow-up focus groups conducted by the
Tarrance Group and Lake Snell Perry & Associates have indicated that,
"The majority of the U.S. adult population does not believe that the
news and information programming on public broadcasting is biased. The
plurality of Americans indicate that there is no apparent bias one way
or the other, while approximately two-in-ten detect a liberal bias and
approximately one-in-ten detect a conservative bias."

Euphemisms
==========

-   *NPR's Ombudswoman Alicia Shepard's defense of the policy was that
    "calling waterboarding torture is tantamount to taking sides."*

-   *In an article which criticized NPR and other U.S. media for their
    use of euphemisms for torture, Glenn Greenwald discussed what he
    called the enabling "corruption of American journalism":*

In a controversial act, NPR banned in 2009 the use of the word "torture"
in the context of the Bush administration's use of enhanced
interrogation techniques. NPR's Ombudswoman Alicia Shepard's defense of
the policy was that "calling waterboarding torture is tantamount to
taking sides." But Berkeley Professor of Linguistics Geoffrey Nunberg
pointed out that virtually all media around the world, other than what
he called the "spineless U.S. media", call these techniques torture. In
an article which criticized NPR and other U.S. media for their use of
euphemisms for torture, Glenn Greenwald discussed what he called the
enabling "corruption of American journalism":

Sexual harassment
=================

-   *Some of the accusations dated back to when he was Washington, D.C.
    bureau chief for The New York Times during the 1990s, while others
    involved his conduct at NPR.*

-   *After a report on the Times accusations was published in The
    Washington Post, NPR put Oreskes on administrative leave, and the
    following day his resignation was requested.*

In October 2017, sexual harassment charges were leveled against Michael
Oreskes, senior vice president of news and editorial director since
2015. Some of the accusations dated back to when he was Washington, D.C.
bureau chief for The New York Times during the 1990s, while others
involved his conduct at NPR. After a report on the Times accusations was
published in The Washington Post, NPR put Oreskes on administrative
leave, and the following day his resignation was requested. CNN's Brian
Stelter reported that NPR staffers were dissatisfied with the handling
of Oreskes, were demanding an external investigation, and that Oreskes
poisoned the newsroom atmosphere by abusing his position to meet young
women.

Live from Death Row commentaries
================================

-   *In 1994, NPR arranged to air, on All Things Considered, a series of
    three-minute commentaries by Mumia Abu-Jamal, a journalist convicted
    in a controversial trial of murdering a Philadelphia Police
    officer.*

In 1994, NPR arranged to air, on All Things Considered, a series of
three-minute commentaries by Mumia Abu-Jamal, a journalist convicted in
a controversial trial of murdering a Philadelphia Police officer. They
cancelled airing them after the Fraternal Order of Police and members of
the U.S. Congress objected.

Juan Williams comments
======================

-   *On October 20, 2010, NPR terminated Senior News Analyst Juan
    Williams's independent contract over a series of incidents
    culminating in remarks he made on the Fox News Channel regarding
    Muslims.*

On October 20, 2010, NPR terminated Senior News Analyst Juan Williams's
independent contract over a series of incidents culminating in remarks
he made on the Fox News Channel regarding Muslims.

Ronald Schiller comments
========================

-   *NPR disavowed Schiller's comments.*

In March 2011, conservative political activist and provocateur James
O'Keefe sent partners Simon Templar (a pen name) and Shaughn Adeleye to
secretly record their discussion with Ronald Schiller, NPR's outgoing
senior vice president for fundraising, and an associate, in which
Schiller made remarks viewed as disparaging of "the current Republican
party, especially the Tea Party", and controversial comments regarding
Palestine and funding for NPR. NPR disavowed Schiller's comments. CEO
Vivian Schiller, who is not related to Ronald, later resigned over the
fallout from the comments and the previous firing of Juan Williams.

July 4th tweets of the Declaration of Independence
==================================================

-   *Starting on July 4, 1988, NPR has broadcast an annual reading of
    the 1776 United States Declaration of Independence over the radio.*

Starting on July 4, 1988, NPR has broadcast an annual reading of the
1776 United States Declaration of Independence over the radio. In 2017
it began using Twitter as a medium for reading the document as well. On
July 4, 2017, the 100+ tweets were met with considerable opposition,
some online supporters of Donald Trump mistakenly believing the words of
the Declaration referring to George III of the United Kingdom to be
directed towards the president. The tweets were called "trash" and were
accused of being left-wing propaganda, condoning violence and calling
for revolution.

Publications
============

-   *The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Classical Music by Tim
    Smith (2002) ISBNÂ 0399527958*

-   *The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Celtic Music by Fiona
    Ritchie (2005) ISBNÂ 0399530711*

-   *The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to World Music by Chris
    Nickson (2004) ISBNÂ 0399530320*

-   *The NPR Listener's Encyclopedia of Classical Music by Ted
    Libbey (2006) ISBNÂ 0761120726*

Source:

The NPR Guide to Building a Classical CD Collection by Ted Libbey (1994)
.mw-parser-output cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.citation q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation
.cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}ISBNÂ 156305051X

The NPR Classical Music Companion: An Essential Guide for Enlightened
Listening by Miles Hoffman (1997) ISBNÂ 0618619453

The NPR Classical Music Companion: Terms and Concepts from A to Z by
Miles Hoffman (1997) ISBNÂ 0395707420

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Classical Music by Tim Smith (2002)
ISBNÂ 0399527958

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Jazz by Loren Schoenberg (2002)
ISBNÂ 039952794X

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Opera by William Berger (2002)
ISBNÂ 0399527435

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Popular Standards by Max Morath
(2002) ISBNÂ 0399527443

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide To American Folk Music by Kip Lornell
(2004) ISBNÂ 0399530339

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to World Music by Chris Nickson (2004)
ISBNÂ 0399530320

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide To Blues by David Evans (2005)
ISBNÂ 039953072X

The NPR Curious Listener's Guide to Celtic Music by Fiona Ritchie (2005)
ISBNÂ 0399530711

The NPR Listener's Encyclopedia of Classical Music by Ted Libbey (2006)
ISBNÂ 0761120726

See also
========

-   *List of NPR personnel*

-   *NPR Berlin the only NPR affiliate operated by NPR itself*

-   *List of NPR stations*

-   *BBC Radio*

Australian Broadcasting Corporation

BBC Radio

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation

List of NPR personnel

List of NPR stations

NPR Berlin the only NPR affiliate operated by NPR itself

PBS

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *"All Things Considered: A Content Analysis of National Public
    Radio's Flagship News Magazine from 1999â2009".*

-   *McCauley, Michael P. NPR: The Trials and Triumphs of National
    Public Radio (Columbia University Press, 2005).*

-   *Journal of Radio & Audio Media (2013) 20\#2 pp.*

Gibson, George H. Public Broadcasting: The Role of the Federal
Government, 1919â1976 (Praeger Publishers, 1977). ISBNÂ 9780030228315.
OCLCÂ 3167293.

McCauley, Michael P. NPR: The Trials and Triumphs of National Public
Radio (Columbia University Press, 2005). ISBNÂ 9780231121606.
OCLCÂ 937175101.

Magee, Sara. "All Things Considered: A Content Analysis of National
Public Radio's Flagship News Magazine from 1999â2009". Journal of Radio
& Audio Media (2013) 20\#2 pp.Â 236â250.

External links
==============

-   *Quotations related to National Public Radio at Wikiquote*

Quotations related to National Public Radio at Wikiquote

Official website
