**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Offshoring\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Offshoring
==========

-   *Offshoring and outsourcing are not mutually inclusive: there can be
    one without the other.*

-   *Typically this refers to a company business, although state
    governments may also employ offshoring.*

-   *Offshoring is when the offshored work is done by means of an
    internal (captive) delivery model., sometimes referred to as
    in-house offshore.*

Offshoring is the relocation of a business process from one country to
another—typically an operational process, such as manufacturing, or
supporting processes, such as accounting. Typically this refers to a
company business, although state governments may also employ offshoring.
More recently, technical and administrative services have been
offshored.

Offshoring and outsourcing are not mutually inclusive: there can be one
without the other. They can be intertwined (Offshore outsourcing), and
can be individually or jointly, partially or completely reversed,
involving terms such as reshoring,\
inshoring, and insourcing.

Offshoring is when the offshored work is done by means of an internal
(captive) delivery model., sometimes referred to as in-house offshore.

Imported services from subsidiaries or other closely related suppliers
are included, whereas intermediate goods, such as partially completed\
cars or computers, may not be.

Motivation
==========

-   *Europe experienced less offshoring than the United States due to
    policies that applied more costs to corporations and cultural
    barriers.*

-   *Jobs are added in the destination country providing the goods or
    services and are subtracted from the higher-cost labor country.*

-   *The increased safety net costs of the unemployed may be absorbed by
    the government (taxpayers) in the high-cost country or by the
    company doing the offshoring.*

Lower cost and increased corporate profitability are often the
motivation; economists call this labor arbitrage. More recently,
offshoring drivers also include access to qualified personnel abroad, in
particular in technical professions, and increasing speed to market.

Jobs are added in the destination country providing the goods or
services and are subtracted from the higher-cost labor country. The
increased safety net costs of the unemployed may be absorbed by the
government (taxpayers) in the high-cost country or by the company doing
the offshoring. Europe experienced less offshoring than the United
States due to policies that applied more costs to corporations and
cultural barriers.

Destinations
============

-   *After its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001,
    the People's Republic of China emerged as a prominent destination
    for production offshoring.*

-   *After technical progress in telecommunications improved the
    possibilities of trade in services, India became one prominent
    destination for such offshoring, though many parts of the world are
    now emerging as offshore destinations.*

After its accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, the
People's Republic of China emerged as a prominent destination for
production offshoring. Another focus area has been the software industry
as part of global software development and developing global information
systems. After technical progress in telecommunications improved the
possibilities of trade in services, India became one prominent
destination for such offshoring, though many parts of the world are now
emerging as offshore destinations.

Frequently used terms
=====================

-   *Subcontracting in the same country would be outsourcing, but not
    offshoring.*

-   *Offshoring can be seen in the context of either production
    offshoring or services offshoring, and refers to substitution of a
    service from any company-owned foreign source for one formerly
    produced in the company's home country, whether or not outsourcing
    is involved.*

-   *A company subcontracting a business unit to a different company in
    another country would be both outsourcing and offshoring: Offshore
    outsourcing.*

Offshoring is defined as the movement of a business process done at a
company in one country to the same company in another country.

It is not the same as outsourcing, which is the movement of internal
business processes to an external organizational unit. This is done
under restrictions and strategies in order to establish consistency with
the offshore outsourcing organizations. Many companies nowadays
outsource various professional areas in the company such as e-mail
services, payroll and call center. These jobs are being handled by other
organizations that specialize in each sector allowing the offshoring
company to focus more on other business concerns.

Subcontracting in the same country would be outsourcing, but not
offshoring. A company moving an internal business unit from one country
to another would be offshoring or physical restructuring, but not
outsourcing. A company subcontracting a business unit to a different
company in another country would be both outsourcing and offshoring:
Offshore outsourcing.

Related terms include

nearshoring, which implies relocation of business processes to
(typically) lower cost foreign locations, but in close geographical
proximity (e.g., shifting United States-based business processes to
Canada, Mexico or Latin America)

inshoring, which means picking services within a country; and

bestshoring or rightshoring, picking the "best shore" based on various
criteria.

Business process outsourcing (BPO) refers to outsourcing arrangements
when entire business functions (such as Finance & Accounting, Customer
Service, etc.) are outsourced. More specific terms can be found in the
field of software development - for example Global Information System as
a class of systems being developed for / by globally distributed teams.

Bodyshopping is the practice of using offshored resources and personnel
to do small disaggregated tasks within a business environment, without
any broader intention to offshore an entire business function.

Offshoring can be seen in the context of either production offshoring or
services offshoring, and refers to substitution of a service from any
company-owned foreign source for one formerly produced in the company's
home country, whether or not outsourcing is involved.

Production offshoring
=====================

-   *Companies under a strong patent system are not afraid to move work
    offshore because their work will remain their property.*

-   *There is a relationship between offshoring and patent-system
    strength.*

-   *Conversely, companies in countries with weak patent systems have an
    increased fear of intellectual property theft from foreign vendors
    or workers, and, therefore, have less offshoring.*

Production offshoring, also known as physical restructuring, of
established products involves relocation of physical manufacturing
processes overseas, usually to a lower-cost destination or one with
fewer regulatory restrictions.

Product design, research and the development process is relatively
difficult to offshore because research and development, to improve
products and create new reference designs, require a higher skill set
not associated with cheap labor.

There is a relationship between offshoring and patent-system strength.
Companies under a strong patent system are not afraid to move work
offshore because their work will remain their property. Conversely,
companies in countries with weak patent systems have an increased fear
of intellectual property theft from foreign vendors or workers, and,
therefore, have less offshoring.

Physical restructuring arrived when the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) made it easier for manufacturers to shift production
facilities from the US to Mexico.

This trend later shifted to China, which offered cheap prices through
very low wage rates, few workers' rights laws, a fixed currency pegged
to the US dollar, (currently fixed to a basket of economies) cheap
loans, cheap land, and factories for new companies, few environmental
regulations, and huge economies of scale based on cities with
populations over a million workers dedicated to producing a single kind
of product. However, many companies are reluctant to move high
value-added production of leading-edge products to China because of lax
enforcement of intellectual property laws.

IT-enabled services offshoring
==============================

-   *Growth of offshoring of IT-enabled services, both to subsidiaries
    and to outside companies (offshore outsourcing) is linked to the
    availability of large amounts of reliable and affordable
    communication infrastructure following the telecommunication and
    Internet expansion of the late 1990s.*

-   *Much of the job movement, however, was to outside companies -
    offshore outsourcing.*

Growth of offshoring of IT-enabled services, both to subsidiaries and to
outside companies (offshore outsourcing) is linked to the availability
of large amounts of reliable and affordable communication infrastructure
following the telecommunication and Internet expansion of the late
1990s.

Much of the job movement, however, was to outside companies - offshore
outsourcing.

Re-shoring
==========

-   *"Re-shoring", also known as "backshoring" or "inshoring" is
    offshoring that has been brought back onshore.*

"Re-shoring", also known as "backshoring" or "inshoring" is offshoring
that has been brought back onshore.

John Urry (distinguished professor of sociology at Lancaster University)
argues that the concealment of income, the avoidance of taxation and
eluding legislation relating to work, finance, pleasure, waste, energy
and security may be becoming a serious concern for democratic
governments and ordinary citizens who may be adversely affected by
unregulated, offshore activities. Further, the rising costs of
transportation could lead to production nearer the point of consumption
becoming more economically viable, particularly as new technologies such
as additive manufacturing mature

Reshoring terminology
=====================

-   *It is the reverse process of offshoring, where manufacturing is
    moved to another country where labor is cheaper.*

-   *The World Bank's 2019 World Development Report on the future of
    work considers the potential for automation to drive companies to
    reshore production, reducing the role of labor in the proess, and
    offers suggestions as to how governments can respond.*

Reshoring (also known as onshoring, inshoring and backshoring) is the
act of reintroducing domestic manufacturing to a country. It is the
reverse process of offshoring, where manufacturing is moved to another
country where labor is cheaper.

The World Bank's 2019 World Development Report on the future of work
considers the potential for automation to drive companies to reshore
production, reducing the role of labor in the proess, and offers
suggestions as to how governments can respond.

United States
=============

-   *For the last twenty years, American companies have been
    "offshoring" and outsourcing manufacturing to low cost countries
    such as China, Malaysia and Vietnam.*

For the last twenty years, American companies have been "offshoring" and
outsourcing manufacturing to low cost countries such as China, Malaysia
and Vietnam.

Government response
===================

-   *This program and website helps companies connect with resources
    available on a Federal, State and local level.*

-   *In January 2012, President Obama Issued a Call to Action to Invest
    in America at the White House "Insourcing American Jobs" Forum.*

President Obama 2011 SelectUSA program was the first federal program to
promote and facilitate U.S. investment in partnership with our states.
This program and website helps companies connect with resources
available on a Federal, State and local level. In January 2012,
President Obama Issued a Call to Action to Invest in America at the
White House "Insourcing American Jobs" Forum.

Success stories
===============

-   *In most cases hundreds if not thousands of jobs were created or
    reinstated.*

-   *There have been several very successful stories of companies.*

Advances in 3D printing technologies brought manufacturers closer to
their customers.

There have been several very successful stories of companies. In most
cases hundreds if not thousands of jobs were created or reinstated. In
the case of Starbucks, in 2012 it saved American Mug and Stein Company
in East Liverpool, Ohio from bankruptcy.

Avoiding failure
================

-   *But reshoring projects are complicated and involve engineering,
    marketing, production, finance, and procurement.*

-   *This is not an uncommon reshoring scenario.*

-   *Some companies pursue reshoring with their own internal staff.*

-   *To help with these projects, companies often turn to consultants
    that specialize in Reshoring.*

There have been some cases of reshoring that weren't successful. Otis
Elevators’ reshoring effort did not go well. Otis says it failed to
consider the consequences of the new location and tried to do too much
at once, including a supply-chain software implementation. This is not
an uncommon reshoring scenario. Bringing manufacturing back to the
United States isn’t so simple, and there are a lot of considerations and
analyses that companies must do to determine the costs and feasibility
of reshoring. Some companies pursue reshoring with their own internal
staff. But reshoring projects are complicated and involve engineering,
marketing, production, finance, and procurement. In addition, there are
real estate concerns, government incentives and training requirements
that require outreach to the community. To help with these projects,
companies often turn to consultants that specialize in Reshoring.

United Kingdom
==============

-   *In the United Kingdom, companies have used the reintroduction of
    domestic call centres as a unique selling point.*

-   *The call centre industry in India has been hit by reshoring, as
    businesses including British Telecom, Santander UK and Aviva all
    announced they would move operations back to Britain in order to
    boost the economy and regain customer satisfaction.*

In the United Kingdom, companies have used the reintroduction of
domestic call centres as a unique selling point. In 2014, the RSA
Insurance Group completed a move of call centres back to Britain. The
call centre industry in India has been hit by reshoring, as businesses
including British Telecom, Santander UK and Aviva all announced they
would move operations back to Britain in order to boost the economy and
regain customer satisfaction.

Transfer of intellectual property
=================================

-   *Offshoring is often enabled by the transfer of valuable information
    to the offshore site.*

Offshoring is often enabled by the transfer of valuable information to
the offshore site. Such information and training enables the remote
workers to produce results of comparable value previously produced by
internal employees. When such transfer includes protected materials, as
confidential documents and trade secrets, protected by non-disclosure
agreements, then intellectual property has been transferred or exported.
The documentation and valuation of such exports is quite difficult, but
should be considered since it comprises items that may be regulated or
taxable.

Debate
======

-   *Offshoring to foreign subsidiaries has been a controversial issue
    spurring heated debates among economists.*

-   *Free trade with low-wage countries is win-lose for many employees
    who find their jobs offshored or with stagnating wages.*

-   *Jobs go to the destination country and lower cost of goods and
    services to the origin country.*

Offshoring to foreign subsidiaries has been a controversial issue
spurring heated debates among economists. Jobs go to the destination
country and lower cost of goods and services to the origin country.

On the other hand, job losses and wage erosion in developed countries
have sparked opposition. Free trade with low-wage countries is win-lose
for many employees who find their jobs offshored or with stagnating
wages.

Currency manipulation by governments and their central banks cause
differences in labor cost. On May 1, 2002, Economist and former
Ambassador Ernest H. Preeg testified before the Senate committee on
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs that China, for instance, pegs its
currency to the dollar at a sub-par value in violation of Article IV of
the International Monetary Fund Articles of Agreement which state that
no nation shall manipulate its currency to gain a market advantage.

Competitive concerns
====================

-   *Some economists and commentators claim that the offshoring
    phenomenon is way overblown.*

-   *The number of jobs lost to offshoring is less than 1 percent of the
    total US labor market.*

-   *The total number of jobs lost to offshoring, both manufacturing and
    technical represent only 4 percent of the total jobs lost in the
    US.*

In 2015, IT employment in the United States has recently reached
pre-2001 levels and has been rising since.

The number of jobs lost to offshoring is less than 1 percent of the
total US labor market. According to a study by the Heritage foundation,
outsourcing represents a very small proportion of jobs lost in the US.
The total number of jobs lost to offshoring, both manufacturing and
technical represent only 4 percent of the total jobs lost in the US.
Major reasons for cutting jobs are from contract completion and
downsizing. Some economists and commentators claim that the offshoring
phenomenon is way overblown.

Impact on jobs in western countries
===================================

-   *Research has found that offshoring has mixed effects on wages and
    employment, with some studies showing insignificant effects, some
    showing negative effects, whereas other studies have found that
    offshoring actually increases low-skilled employment and wages in
    the offshoring country.*

-   *The World Bank's 2019 World Development Report on the future of
    work highlights how offshoring can shape the demand for skills in
    receiving countries and explores how increasing automation can lead
    to reshoring of production in some cases.*

The Economist reported in January 2013 that: "High levels of
unemployment in Western countries after the 2007-2008 financial crisis
have made the public in many countries so hostile towards offshoring
that many companies are now reluctant to engage in it." Economist Paul
Krugman wrote in 2007 that while free trade among high-wage countries is
viewed as win-win, free trade with low-wage countries is win-lose for
many employees who find their jobs offshored or with stagnating wages.

Two estimates of the impact of offshoring on U.S. jobs were between
150,000 and 300,000 per year from 2004-2015. This represents 10-15% of
U.S. job creation.

The increased safety net costs of the unemployed may be absorbed by the
government (taxpayers) in the high-cost country or by the company doing
the offshoring. Europe experienced less offshoring than the U.S. due to
policies that applied more costs to corporations and cultural barriers.

Research has found that offshoring has mixed effects on wages and
employment, with some studies showing insignificant effects, some
showing negative effects, whereas other studies have found that
offshoring actually increases low-skilled employment and wages in the
offshoring country. A 2017 study found that offshoring benefits
"offshoring can generate wage and employment gains for both high- and
low-skilled workers through a “technology channel” wherein it induces
skill-complementary capital deepening and greater innovation in U.S.
industries." The study also found that "offshoring increases real wages
for both high- and low-skilled workers, but more so for the former,
increasing inequality."

The World Bank's 2019 World Development Report on the future of work
highlights how offshoring can shape the demand for skills in receiving
countries and explores how increasing automation can lead to reshoring
of production in some cases.

Public opinion
==============

-   *U.S. opinion polls indicate that between 76-95% of Americans
    surveyed agreed that "outsourcing of production and manufacturing
    work to foreign countries is a reason the U.S. economy is struggling
    and more people aren't being hired."*

U.S. opinion polls indicate that between 76-95% of Americans surveyed
agreed that "outsourcing of production and manufacturing work to foreign
countries is a reason the U.S. economy is struggling and more people
aren't being hired."

Effects of factor of production mobility
========================================

-   *Offshoring relies heavily on the mobility of labor and capital;
    land has little or no mobility potential.*

-   *Most theories that argue offshoring eventually benefits domestic
    workers assume that those workers will be able to obtain new jobs,
    even if by accepting lower salaries or by retraining themselves in a
    new field.*

-   *For the same reason the macroeconomy must be free for offshoring to
    succeed.*

-   *In microeconomics, working capital funds the initial costs of
    offshoring.*

According to classical economics, the three factors of production are
land, labor, and capital. Offshoring relies heavily on the mobility of
labor and capital; land has little or no mobility potential.

In microeconomics, working capital funds the initial costs of
offshoring. If the state heavily regulates how a corporation can spend
its working capital, it will not be able to offshore its operations. For
the same reason the macroeconomy must be free for offshoring to succeed.

Computers and the Internet made work in the services industry
electronically portable. Most theories that argue offshoring eventually
benefits domestic workers assume that those workers will be able to
obtain new jobs, even if by accepting lower salaries or by retraining
themselves in a new field. Foreign workers benefit from new jobs and
higher wages when the work moves to them.

Labor scholars argue that global labor arbitrage leads to unethical
practices, connected to exploitation of workers, eroding work conditions
and decreasing job security.

History
=======

-   *This offshoring and closing of factories has caused a structural
    change in the developed world from an industrial to a
    post-industrial service society.*

-   *In the developed world, moving manufacturing jobs out of the
    country dates to at least the 1960s while moving knowledge service
    jobs offshore dates to the 1970s and has continued since then.*

In the developed world, moving manufacturing jobs out of the country
dates to at least the 1960s while moving knowledge service jobs offshore
dates to the 1970s and has continued since then. It was characterized
primarily by the transferring of factories from the developed to the
developing world. This offshoring and closing of factories has caused a
structural change in the developed world from an industrial to a
post-industrial service society.

During the 20th century, the decreasing costs of transportation and
communication crossed with great disparities on pay rates made increased
offshoring from wealthier countries to less wealthy countries
financially feasible for many companies. Further, the growth of the
Internet, particularly fiber-optic intercontinental long haul capacity,
and the World Wide Web reduced "transportation" costs for many kinds of
information work to near zero.

Impact of the Internet
======================

-   *Regardless of size, companies benefit from accessibility to labor
    resources across the world.*

Regardless of size, companies benefit from accessibility to labor
resources across the world. This gave rise to business models such as
Remote In-Sourcing that allow companies to tap into resources found
abroad, without losing control over security of product quality.

New categories of work such as call centres, computer programming,
reading medical data such as X-rays and magnetic resonance imaging,
medical transcription, income tax preparation, and title searching are
being offshored.

Ireland
=======

-   *Because of Ireland's relatively low corporate tax rates, US
    companies began offshoring of software, electronic, and
    pharmaceutical intellectual property to Ireland for export.*

-   *Before the 1990s, Ireland was one of the poorest countries in the
    EU.*

Before the 1990s, Ireland was one of the poorest countries in the EU.
Because of Ireland's relatively low corporate tax rates, US companies
began offshoring of software, electronic, and pharmaceutical
intellectual property to Ireland for export. This helped create a
high-tech "boom" and which led to Ireland becoming one of the richest EU
countries.

NAFTA
=====

-   *The plan to create free trade areas (such as Free Trade Area of the
    Americas) has not yet been successful.*

-   *In 1994 the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) went into
    effect, and it increased the velocity of physical restructuring.*

-   *In 2005, offshoring of skilled work, also referred to as knowledge
    work, dramatically increased from the US, which fed the growing
    worries about threats of job loss.*

In 1994 the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) went into
effect, and it increased the velocity of physical restructuring.

The plan to create free trade areas (such as Free Trade Area of the
Americas) has not yet been successful. In 2005, offshoring of skilled
work, also referred to as knowledge work, dramatically increased from
the US, which fed the growing worries about threats of job loss.

Offshore outsourcing
====================

-   *Information technology outsourcing (ITO) is where outsourcing
    related to technology or internet such as computer programming.*

-   *There are four basic types of offshore outsourcing:*

-   *Knowledge process outsourcing (KPO) is a type of outsourcing which
    involves or requires a more advanced technical skill and a higher
    level of expertise.*

There are four basic types of offshore outsourcing:

Information technology outsourcing (ITO) is where outsourcing related to
technology or internet such as computer programming.

Business process outsourcing (BPO) involves contracting out of
operational functions to a third party service provider.

Offshore software development

Knowledge process outsourcing (KPO) is a type of outsourcing which
involves or requires a more advanced technical skill and a higher level
of expertise.

Criteria
========

-   *There is a significant wage difference between the original and
    offshore countries;*

-   *The work is repeatable\[citation needed\].*

-   *The work can be transmitted over the Internet;*

The general criteria for a job to be offshore-able are:

There is a significant wage difference between the original and offshore
countries;

The job can be telework;

The work can be transmitted over the Internet;

The work is repeatable\[citation needed\].

Source of conflict
==================

-   *Research suggests that these wage increases could redirect some
    offshoring elsewhere.*

-   *The opposing sides regarding offshoring, outsourcing, and offshore
    outsourcing are those seeking government intervention and
    Protectionism versus the side advocating Free Trade.*

-   *Free-trade advocates suggest economies as a whole will obtain a net
    benefit from labor offshoring, but it is unclear if the displaced
    receive a net benefit.*

The opposing sides regarding offshoring, outsourcing, and offshore
outsourcing are those seeking government intervention and Protectionism
versus the side advocating Free Trade.

Jobs formerly held by U.S. workers have been lost, even as
underdeveloped countries such as Brazil and Turkey flourish. Free-trade
advocates suggest economies as a whole will obtain a net benefit from
labor offshoring, but it is unclear if the displaced receive a net
benefit.

Some wages overseas are rising. A study by the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics found that Chinese wages were almost tripled in the seven
years following 2002. Research suggests that these wage increases could
redirect some offshoring elsewhere.

Increased training and education has been advocated to offset
trade-related displacements, but it is no longer a comparative advantage
of high-wage nations because education costs are lower in low-wage
countries.

See also
========

-   *Offshore custom software development*

By sector:

Information technology consulting

Offshore custom software development

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *An Atlas of Offshore Outsourcing by David E. Gumpert (BusinessWeek
    online)*

An Atlas of Offshore Outsourcing by David E. Gumpert (BusinessWeek
online)

Further reading
===============

-   *"Survey says reshoring 'symbolic' and will not lead to jobs boom".*

-   *Alan S. Blinder, "Offshoring: The Next Industrial Revolution?"*

-   *"Outsourcing not what you think, say researchers".*

-   *Retrieved 20 May 2015.*

-   *Stephan Manning, Silvia Massini & Arie Y. Lewin, A Dynamic
    Perspective on Next-Generation Offshoring: The Global Sourcing of
    Science and Engineering Talent, Academy of Management Perspectives,
    Vol.*

-   *Retrieved May 20, 2015.*

Consulate General of the Kingdom of The Netherlands Guangzhou (2011).
Outsourcing Comparison Study South-East Asia: China, India, Vietnam
2011-2012.

"More Support to Push Reshoring". Coventry Evening Telegraph. October
28, 2013 – via Questia Online Library.

Annie Baxter (March 13, 2012). "Factories 'Reshore' Some Work From
Overseas". All Things Considered. National Public Radio. Retrieved May
20, 2015.

Adam Belz (January 13, 2013). "Report shows U.S. manufacturers continue
to lag". Star Tribune. Minneapolis.

Alan S. Blinder, "Offshoring: The Next Industrial Revolution?" in
Foreign Affairs, Vol. 85, No. 2 (March/April 2006), pp. 113–128.

Andrew Bounds (May 10, 2013). "Survey says reshoring 'symbolic' and will
not lead to jobs boom". Globe and Mail. Toronto.

Kevin Carmichael (June 4, 2013). "Canada's 'reshoring' opportunity".
Globe and Mail. Toronto.

Thomas L. Friedman, The World is Flat: A Brief History of the
Twenty-first Century (2005).

Jon Griffin (March 3, 2014). "Bosses Back to UK in Reshoring Moves".
Birmingham Mail. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016 – via
HighBeam Research.

Mark Hennessy (March 5, 2014). "Wheels of Industry Turn Faster as UK
Brings Manufacturing Back Home". The Irish Times. Archived from the
original on March 8, 2016 – via HighBeam Research.

Catherine L. Mann & Jacob Funk Kirkegaard, Accelerating the
Globalization of America: The Role for Information Technology, Institute
for International Economics, Washington D.C., Peterson Institute for
International Economics (June 2006).

Stephan Manning, Silvia Massini & Arie Y. Lewin, A Dynamic Perspective
on Next-Generation Offshoring: The Global Sourcing of Science and
Engineering Talent, Academy of Management Perspectives, Vol. 22, No. 3
(October 2008), pp. 35–54. JSTOR 27747462

Ed Marcum (August 7, 2010). "Some businesses learning value of bringing
factories back to the U.S." Knoxville News Sentinel.

Jackie Northam (January 27, 2014). "As Overseas Costs Rise, More U.S.
Companies Are 'Reshoring'". All Things Considered. National Public
Radio. Retrieved 20 May 2015.

Jon Talton (February ss, 2014). "Outsourcing not what you think, say
researchers". Seattle Times. Check date values in: |date= (help)

Jim Zarroli (December 16, 2014). "'Reshoring' Trend Has Little Impact On
U.S. Economy, Study Finds". Morning Edition. National Public Radio.
Retrieved May 20, 2015.

"Industrial Property Boost as Manufacturers Return Home". Birmingham
Post. December 4, 2014 – via Questia Online Library.
