**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On\_the\_Line\_%28Gary\_U.S.\_Bonds\_album%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

On the Line (Gary U.S. Bonds album)
===================================

-   *On the Line is an album released by Gary U.S. Bonds in 1982, the
    second of two on which he collaborated with Bruce Springsteen & the
    E Street Band, the first being Dedication, released the previous
    year, 1981.*

On the Line is an album released by Gary U.S. Bonds in 1982, the second
of two on which he collaborated with Bruce Springsteen & the E Street
Band, the first being Dedication, released the previous year, 1981.

Background
==========

-   *Springsteen's version of "Rendezvous" was finally released in 2010
    on The Promise.*

-   *The musicians accompanying Bonds on the album include many members
    of the E Street Band.*

-   *Additionally, the liner notes state that three other songs were
    recorded for the album but not present on the final release
    including Springsteen's "Action In the Street", "Lion's Den", and
    "Savin' Up".*

The musicians accompanying Bonds on the album include many members of
the E Street Band. The album includes seven songs written by
Springsteen, one written by Steven Van Zandt, and two written by Bonds
himself ("Turn the Music Down", "Bring Her Back"), and features a duet
with Steven Van Zandt on the track "Angelyne". The album produced one
single, "Out of Work" which peaked at \#21 on the Billboard Pop Singles
charts.

According to the liner notes on the Razor & Tie reissue, after recording
the album, Columbia Records had Bruce Springsteen remove his vocals from
the tracks, specifically from the track "Angelyne", so Van Zandt stepped
up to record the duet instead. Because of this, although Springsteen can
still be heard on several of the tracks, he is not credited in the
original liner notes. Additionally, the liner notes state that three
other songs were recorded for the album but not present on the final
release including Springsteen's "Action In the Street", "Lion's Den",
and "Savin' Up". Springsteen's version of "Lion's Den" was eventually
released in 1998 on his boxset Tracks and "Savin' Up" appeared on
Clarence Clemons' first solo album Rescue (1983); "Action in the Street"
remains unreleased. Springsteen's version of "Rendezvous" was finally
released in 2010 on The Promise.

The album was re-released in 1992 on the Razor Edge label of Razor & Tie
music, and then again in 2009 on BGO Records paired with Dedication.

Track listing
=============

-   *"Love's On the Line" (Springsteen) – 3:38*

-   *"Hold On (To What You Got)" (Bruce Springsteen) – 3:05*

-   *"Club Soul City" (Springsteen) – 3:36*

-   *"Angelyne" (Springsteen) – 4:03*

-   *"All I Need" (Springsteen) – 5:10*

-   *"Out of Work" (Springsteen) – 2:53*

-   *"Rendezvous" (Springsteen) – 2:41*

"Hold On (To What You Got)" (Bruce Springsteen) – 3:05

"Out of Work" (Springsteen) – 2:53

"Club Soul City" (Springsteen) – 3:36

"Soul Deep" (Wayne Carson) – 3:16

"Love's On the Line" (Springsteen) – 3:38

"Turn the Music Down" (Gary L. Anderson) – 3:37

"Rendezvous" (Springsteen) – 2:41

"Angelyne" (Springsteen) – 4:03

"All I Need" (Springsteen) – 5:10

"Bring Her Back" (Anderson) – 3:45

"Last Time" (Steven Van Zandt) – 4:45

Personnel
=========

Musicians \[7\]
===============

-   *Gary U.S. Bonds – lead vocals*

-   *Bruce Springsteen – background vocals (credited under the pseudonym
    "Rusty Cloud")*

Gary U.S. Bonds – lead vocals

Bruce Springsteen – background vocals (credited under the pseudonym
"Rusty Cloud")

Steven Van Zandt – guitar (solo "Last Time"), background vocals (solo
"Angelyne")

Roy Bittan – keyboards

Clarence Clemons – saxophone (solo "Angelyne" & "Out of Work"),
background vocals

Danny Federici – keyboards (solo "Club Soul City"), accordion

Max Weinberg – drums

Garry Tallent – bass

Additional Musicians
====================

-   *George Ruiz – bass, background vocals*

-   *Rusty Cloud – keyboards (solo "Bring Her Back"), background vocals*

-   *Bowen – background vocals ("Out of Work")*

-   *Charles Jackson – background vocals ("Club Soul City")*

-   *Joe Martin – guitar, background vocals*

-   *Joey Stann – saxophone (solo "Bring Her Back" & "Love's On the
    Line"), background vocals*

Charles Jackson – background vocals ("Club Soul City")

J.T. Bowen – background vocals ("Out of Work")

Rusty Cloud – keyboards (solo "Bring Her Back"), background vocals

Bill Derby – guitar (solo "Turn the Music Down"), background vocals

Joe Martin – guitar, background vocals

Mike Micara – drums

George Ruiz – bass, background vocals

Joey Stann – saxophone (solo "Bring Her Back" & "Love's On the Line"),
background vocals

Technical
=========

-   *Bruce Springsteen – producer*

Bruce Springsteen – producer

Steven Van Zandt – producer

Neil Dorfsman – engineer

Gary Rindfuss – assistant engineer

Josh Abbey – assistant engineer

Toby Scott – mixing

Dana Brisbee – assistant mixing

External links
==============
