**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ordinary\_seaman\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Ordinary seaman
===============

-   *An ordinary seaman (OS) is a naval rating of the deck department of
    a ship.*

-   *However, in most cases, one can expect an ordinary seaman to clean,
    to perform maintenance, to work with deck equipment, and to undergo
    on-the-job-training under the supervision of senior deck department
    members.*

-   *The position is an apprenticeship to become an able seaman, and has
    been for centuries.*

An ordinary seaman (OS) is a naval rating of the deck department of a
ship. The position is an apprenticeship to become an able seaman, and
has been for centuries. In modern times, an OS is required to work on a
ship for a specific amount of time, gaining what is referred to as "sea
time". For centuries, the term ordinary seaman was used to refer to a
seaman with between one and two years' experience at sea, who showed
enough seamanship to be so rated by their captain.

An OS is generally not required to stand watch, but must pass
examinations on watchstanding skills such as performing lookout duty and
being a helmsman. Thus an OS will often be found on a ship's bridge
after working hours taking a turn at the ship's wheel or being
familiarized with bridge equipment.

During the apprenticeship, an OS performs a variety of duties concerned
with the operation and upkeep of deck department areas and equipment.
These duties vary with the type of ship, the type of voyage, the number
of crewmembers, the weather, the supervisor, and any number of other
variables. However, in most cases, one can expect an ordinary seaman to
clean, to perform maintenance, to work with deck equipment, and to
undergo on-the-job-training under the supervision of senior deck
department members.

Duties
======

-   *On specialized vessels, an OS may have unique duties.*

-   *As an ordinary seaman, one's duties may include the following:*

As an ordinary seaman, one's duties may include the following:

On specialized vessels, an OS may have unique duties. For example, on
research vessels, an OS may rig and operate hydrographic and other
specialty winches; handle and stow oceanographic explosives; and stage
and stow beach support equipment.

Advancement
===========

United States
=============

-   *The next step on the career ladder for the ordinary seaman is to
    become an able seaman.*

The next step on the career ladder for the ordinary seaman is to become
an able seaman. This advancement is based on a number of factors laid
out in the Code of Federal Regulations.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="3.923332239720035in" height="5.5in"}\
*AB's were in high demand during World War II.*

Training
========

-   *Special certificates of service are available for Able Seaman,
    Great Lakes—18 months service; Able Seaman, Any waters—12 months;
    Able Seaman, Tugs and towboats—any waters; Able Seaman, Bays and
    sounds—12 months, vessels 500 gross tons or less not carrying
    passengers; and Able Seaman, Seagoing barges—12 months.*

The Code of Federal Regulations establishes in 46 CFR 12.05 four
categories of able seaman for the United States Merchant Marine:

Able Seaman—Any Waters, Unlimited. Requires three years service on deck
on vessels operating on the oceans or the Great Lakes.

Able Seaman—Limited. Requires 18 months service on deck in vessels of
100 gross tons or more which operate in a service not exclusively
confined to the rivers and smaller inland lakes of the United States.

Able Seaman—Special. Requires 12 months service on deck on vessels
operating on the oceans, or the navigable waters of the United States
including the Great Lakes.

Able Seaman—Special (OSV). Requires six months service on deck on
vessels operating on the oceans, or the navigable waters of the United
States including the Great Lakes.

Time served in certain training programs and school ships may be
substituted for the time of service listed above. Special certificates
of service are available for Able Seaman, Great Lakes—18 months service;
Able Seaman, Any waters—12 months; Able Seaman, Tugs and towboats—any
waters; Able Seaman, Bays and sounds—12 months, vessels 500 gross tons
or less not carrying passengers; and Able Seaman, Seagoing barges—12
months.

Examination requirements
========================

-   *For the United States Merchant Marine, the Code of Federal
    Regulations establishes in 46 CFR 12.05 examination requirements for
    the certification of able seamen, which includes:*

For the United States Merchant Marine, the Code of Federal Regulations
establishes in 46 CFR 12.05 examination requirements for the
certification of able seamen, which includes:

Competence as a lifeboatman, including showing:

training in all the operations connected with the launching of lifeboats
and life-rafts, and in the use of oars;

acquaintance with the practical handling of boats; including the ability
to command the boat's crew.

An examination, conducted only in English, consisting of questions
regarding:

lifeboats and life-rafts, the names of their essential parts, and a
description of the required equipment;

the clearing away, swinging out and lowering of lifeboats and
life-rafts, and handling of lifeboats under oars and sails, including
questions relative to the proper handling of a boat in a heavy sea;

the operation and functions of commonly used types of davits;

knowledge of nautical terms; boxing the compass, either by degrees or
points; running lights, passing signals, and fog signals for vessels on
the high seas, in inland waters, or on the Great Lakes depending upon
the waters on which the applicant has served; and distress signals; and,

knowledge of proper response to commands for handling the wheel and
knowledge of the use of engine room telegraph or bell-pull signals.

In the actual demonstration, the applicant shall show ability by taking
command of a boat and directing the operation of clearing away, swinging
out, lowering the boat into the water, and acting as coxswain in charge
of the boat under oars. The AB shall demonstrate ability to row by
pulling an oar in the boat. The applicant shall also demonstrate
knowledge of the principal knots, bends, splices, and hitches in common
use by tying them.

The applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Officer in
Charge, Marine Inspection, knowledge of pollution laws and regulations,
procedures for discharge containment and cleanup, and methods for
disposal of sludge and waste material from cargo and fueling operations.

See also
========

-   *Able Seaman (occupation)*

Seafarer's professions and ranks

Able Seaman (occupation)

STCW

Merchant Mariner's Document

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *"Seaman, Merchant Marine".*

International Labour Organization (2000-12-05). "Seaman, Merchant
Marine". International Hazard Datasheets on Occupation. Retrieved
2007-05-26.
