**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oudong\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Oudong
======

-   *Located at the foothill of the mountain Phnom Udong, about 40 km
    northwest of the modern capital Phnom Penh, Oudong was royal
    residence and Cambodia's capital for more than 250 years
    until 1866.*

-   *Oudong (Khmer: ឧដុង្គ) (also romanized as Udong or Odong) is a town
    in Cambodia, situated in the north-western part of Kampong Speu
    Province.*

Oudong (Khmer: ឧដុង្គ) (also romanized as Udong or Odong) is a town in
Cambodia, situated in the north-western part of Kampong Speu Province.
Located at the foothill of the mountain Phnom Udong, about 40 km
northwest of the modern capital Phnom Penh, Oudong was royal residence
and Cambodia's capital for more than 250 years until 1866. A monumental
royal necropolis of sovereigns of several centuries is scattered on top
the prominent bisected mountain, which runs from the southeast to the
northeast.

Etymology
=========

-   *The city's name is derived from the Sanskrit word "uttuṅga"
    (Sanskrit: उत्तुङ्ग), meaning tall, which probably refers to the
    mountain.*

The city's name is derived from the Sanskrit word "uttuṅga" (Sanskrit:
उत्तुङ्ग), meaning tall, which probably refers to the mountain. As it
had gained religious merit and significance it might have undergone
extension towards: "great" or "supreme".

History
=======

-   *This proved to be a trial-run for the evacuation of Phnom Penh a
    year later.*

-   *Oudong was founded by King Srei Soryapor in 1601, after the
    abandonment of Longvek.*

-   *From 1618 until 1866 it was formally called Oudong Meanchey, home
    to a succession of kings deposed from the former capital of Lovek by
    the invading Thais.*

-   *In 1866, it was abandoned by King Norodom, taking his royal court
    along with him to the current capital, Phnom Penh.*

Oudong was founded by King Srei Soryapor in 1601, after the abandonment
of Longvek. Under the reign of King Ang Duong (1841-1850), he
constructed canals, terraces, bridges and erected hundreds of pagodas in
this region.

From 1618 until 1866 it was formally called Oudong Meanchey, home to a
succession of kings deposed from the former capital of Lovek by the
invading Thais. In 1866, it was abandoned by King Norodom, taking his
royal court along with him to the current capital, Phnom Penh.

During the Cambodian Civil War the town was captured by Khmer Rouge in
March 1974, and marched the citizens into the countryside, as well as
execution a large number of prisoners. This proved to be a trial-run for
the evacuation of Phnom Penh a year later. The Government retook the
town in August the same year, but evidence of atrocities was widely
discarded by international journalists.

It was extensively damaged by the Khmer Rouge in 1977, along with the
other temples, monuments, and religious structures there.

Folklore
========

-   *Legend has it that in the Arthaross Temple (Temple of Eighteen
    Points, from Pali: अट्ठारस aṭṭhārasa, eighteen ), the Buddha located
    here faces north instead of the traditional direction of east,
    symbolizing a testimony to the strength and power of the ancient
    Khmer kingdom.*

Legend has it that in the Arthaross Temple (Temple of Eighteen Points,
from Pali: अट्ठारस aṭṭhārasa, eighteen ), the Buddha located here faces
north instead of the traditional direction of east, symbolizing a
testimony to the strength and power of the ancient Khmer kingdom.

Henri Mouhot: "Travels in the Central Parts of Indo-China" 1864:

World Heritage Status
=====================

-   *This site was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List on
    September 1, 1992 in the Cultural category.*

This site was added to the UNESCO World Heritage Tentative List on
September 1, 1992 in the Cultural category.

See also
========

-   *History of Cambodia*

-   *Dark ages of Cambodia*

Dark ages of Cambodia

History of Cambodia

References
==========

Sources
=======

-   *"The Rough Guide Southeast Asia" Rough Guides, 2002
    ISBN 1-85828-893-2*

"The Rough Guide Southeast Asia" Rough Guides, 2002 ISBN 1-85828-893-2

External links
==============

-   *Brief History of Oudong*

-   *Travels in the Central Parts of Indo-China (Siam), Cambodia, and
    Laos (Vol.*

Brief History of Oudong

Travels in the Central Parts of Indo-China (Siam), Cambodia, and Laos
(Vol. 1 of 2)

Coordinates: 11°49′26″N 104°44′33″E﻿ / ﻿11.82389°N 104.74250°E﻿ /
11.82389; 104.74250
