**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxfordshire%20County%20Council\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Oxfordshire County Council
==========================

-   *Oxfordshire County Council, established in 1889, is the county
    council, or upper-tier local authority, for the non-metropolitan
    county of Oxfordshire, in the South East of England, an elected body
    responsible for the most strategic local government services in the
    county.*

Oxfordshire County Council, established in 1889, is the county council,
or upper-tier local authority, for the non-metropolitan county of
Oxfordshire, in the South East of England, an elected body responsible
for the most strategic local government services in the county.

History
=======

-   *The areas they covered were termed administrative counties and were
    not in all cases identical to the traditional shire counties, but in
    Oxfordshire the whole 'ceremonial county' came under the authority
    of the new council.*

-   *The first elections to the new county council were held in
    January 1889.*

-   *Oxfordshire County Council has seen a changing pattern of
    lower-tier authorities existing alongside it within its area,
    responsible for more local services, such as housing and waste
    collection.*

County Councils were first introduced in England and Wales with full
powers from 22 September 1889 as a result of the Local Government Act
1888, taking over administrative functions until then carried out by the
unelected Quarter Sessions. The areas they covered were termed
administrative counties and were not in all cases identical to the
traditional shire counties, but in Oxfordshire the whole 'ceremonial
county' came under the authority of the new council. The new system of
local democracy was a significant development and reflected the
increasing range of functions carried out by local government in late
Victorian Britain.

The first elections to the new county council were held in January 1889.
At the first meeting, several aldermen were elected.

Schools (both primary and secondary) were added to the County Council's
responsibilities in 1902, and until the 1990s it was also responsible
for operating Colleges of Further Education.

Oxfordshire County Council has seen a changing pattern of lower-tier
authorities existing alongside it within its area, responsible for more
local services, such as housing and waste collection. Until 1974, the
county had a large number of urban district and rural district councils.
In 1974, local government was reorganized in England and Wales
generally, and Oxfordshire was enlarged to take in areas previously in
Berkshire. Within its new area dozens of former urban and rural
districts were amalgamated into one city council, that of Oxford, and
four district councils: Cherwell, South Oxfordshire, the Vale of White
Horse, and West Oxfordshire.

Functions
=========

-   *Oxfordshire County Council provides a wide range of services,
    including education (schools, libraries and youth services), social
    services, public health ,highway maintenance, waste disposal,
    emergency planning, consumer protection and town and country
    planning for matters to do with minerals, waste, highways and
    education.*

Oxfordshire County Council provides a wide range of services, including
education (schools, libraries and youth services), social services,
public health ,highway maintenance, waste disposal, emergency planning,
consumer protection and town and country planning for matters to do with
minerals, waste, highways and education. This makes it one of the
largest employers in Oxfordshire, with an annual budget of £899 million
in 2013–14.

Elections
=========

-   *Until the 1970s, the elected members chose aldermen, whose term of
    office was for six years, and who once appointed were also voting
    members of the council.*

Since 1889, members have been elected for a term of office, with
elections held all together (initially every three years, later every
four years) on the "first past the post" system. Until the 1970s, the
elected members chose aldermen, whose term of office was for six years,
and who once appointed were also voting members of the council. This
form of membership was ended by the Local Government Act 1972, so that
after 1974 only honorary (that is, non-voting) aldermen could be
appointed.

Composition
===========

-   *The current council composition is as follows:*

The current council composition is as follows:

2017 election
=============

-   *The council currently consists of sixty-three county councillors
    and no party has overall control.*

The council currently consists of sixty-three county councillors and no
party has overall control. The Conservative Party has thirty-one
members, with fourteen Labour, thirteen Liberal Democrats, four
Independents and one Henley Residents Group member.

The next election will be held on 6 May 2021.

History of political control
============================

Past Chairmen
=============

-   *John Sanders (2015–16)*

-   *Lesley Legge (2006-7)*

-   *Catherine Fulljames (2005-6)*

-   *Don Seale (2012–13)*

John Sanders (2015–16)

Don Seale (2012–13)

Lesley Legge (2006-7)

Catherine Fulljames (2005-6)

List of notable members
=======================

-   *Caroline Lucas, member 1993–97, later Member of Parliament for
    Brighton Pavilion*

-   *Julia Drown, member 1989–96, later Member of Parliament for Swindon
    South*

-   *John Redwood, member 1973–77, later Member of Parliament for
    Wokingham*

-   *James Plaskitt, member 1985–97, later Member of Parliament*

-   *John Howell, member 2004–09, later Member of Parliament*

George Parker, 7th Earl of Macclesfield, chairman 1937–70

William Bradshaw, Baron Bradshaw, member 1993–2008

James Plaskitt, member 1985–97, later Member of Parliament

Peter Butler, member 1985–89, later Member of Parliament for Milton
Keynes North East

Angela Billingham, member 1993–94, later Baroness Billingham

Sherman Stonor, 6th Baron Camoys, member

Olive Gibbs, chairman 1974–1975 and 1981–1982

Julia Drown, member 1989–96, later Member of Parliament for Swindon
South

John Howell, member 2004–09, later Member of Parliament

John Redwood, member 1973–77, later Member of Parliament for Wokingham

Caroline Lucas, member 1993–97, later Member of Parliament for Brighton
Pavilion

See also
========

-   *List of electoral wards in Oxfordshire*

List of electoral wards in Oxfordshire

Notes
=====

External links
==============

-   *Official website*

Official website
