**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pampers\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Pampers
=======

-   *Pampers is an American brand of baby and toddler products marketed
    by Procter & Gamble.*

Pampers is an American brand of baby and toddler products marketed by
Procter & Gamble.

History
=======

-   *In 1998, Procter & Gamble introduced its largest diaper at the
    time, Pampers Baby-Dry Size 6.*

-   *In 1966, Pampers launched a 'wingfold' design and by 1969 started a
    "third size".*

-   *In 1993, Pampers introduced training pants, but the Pampers
    Trainers were a short lived product.*

-   *Pampers were introduced in 1961.*

In 1956, P&G researcher Victor Mills disliked changing the cloth diapers
of his newborn grandchild. So he assigned fellow researchers in P&G's
Exploratory Division in Miami Valley, Ohio to look into making a better
disposable diaper. Pampers were introduced in 1961. They were created by
researchers at P&G including Vic Mills and Norma Lueders Baker. The name
"Pampers" was coined by Alfred Goldman, Creative Director at Benton &
Bowles, the first ad agency for the account.

These early diapers were bulky, heavy products composed of fluff pulp
with a rayon topsheet, polyethylene backsheet. In 1966, Pampers launched
a 'wingfold' design and by 1969 started a "third size". By this time,
Pampers had become a national brand in the United States.\[citation
needed\] Procter and Gamble replaced the pin-on design with tapes in
1971. Toddler and Premature Infant sizes were also introduced. In 1973,
P&G developed elasticized single and double gussets around the leg and
waist areas to aid in fitting and in containing urine or stool which had
not been absorbed. In fact, the first patent for the use of double
gussets in a diaper was in 1973 by P&G. In 1982, Pampers introduced an
elasticized wingfold diaper with elastic leg gathers and refastenable
tapes which was a cross between the early 1960s design and the modern
hourglass shape, a feature that was first introduced on Luvs in 1976 and
evolved into an industry standard in 1985. \[citation needed\] In 1986,
thin diapers made with absorbent gelling material were released. This
made the average weight of a typical medium size diaper decrease by 50%.
In 1987, Pampers and Huggies both introduced frontal tape systems which
allow repositioning of the lateral tape without tearing the diaper. In
the 1990s Pampers introduced a thinner diaper known as Ultra Dry Thins.

The early 1990s also saw the introduction of gender-specific diapers in
the Pampers brand; the product returned to unisex diapers towards the
end of the decade. In 1993, Pampers introduced training pants, but the
Pampers Trainers were a short lived product. Pampers did not sell
training pants again until the introduction of Easy Up. In 1996, P&G
acquired Baby Fresh wipes from Kimberly-Clark; Kimberly-Clark had
recently acquired Baby Fresh owner Scott Paper Company and was ordered
to sell the wipes business. In 1998, Procter & Gamble introduced its
largest diaper at the time, Pampers Baby-Dry Size 6. It was promoted in
an advertising campaign featuring pediatrician and child development
expert Dr. T. Berry Brazelton, who said to let the child decide when the
time is right to potty train. The size 6 diapers were billed for growing
toddlers. Huggies also introduced a size 6 diaper at this time.

In 2018 the company launched its newest diaper line called Pampers Pure
which was designed without chlorine bleaching, fragrance, lotion,
parabens, natural rubber latex and 26 allergens identified by the
European Union. The wipes launched with the new collection contain 99%
water and premium cotton. Pampers announced that the goal was to give
parents an option for an affordable natural diaper brand.

Products
========

-   *Pampers offers five different kinds of diapers in nine sizes, four
    kinds of toilet training pants, swim pants and four kinds of diaper
    wipes (Sensitive, Natural Clean, Baby Fresh Wipes, and Kandoo
    Flushable Toilet Wipes).*

Pampers offers five different kinds of diapers in nine sizes, four kinds
of toilet training pants, swim pants and four kinds of diaper wipes
(Sensitive, Natural Clean, Baby Fresh Wipes, and Kandoo Flushable Toilet
Wipes).

Diapers
=======

-   *Pampers Swaddlers Sensitive Diaper*

-   *Pampers Splashers*

-   *Pampers Swaddlers*

-   *Pampers Baby Dry*

-   *Pampers Cruisers*

-   *Pampers Simply Dry*

-   *Pampers Easy Ups Training Underwear for Girls & Boys*

Pampers Swaddlers

Pampers Swaddlers Sensitive Diaper

Pampers Cruisers

Pampers Baby Dry

Pampers Simply Dry

Pampers Easy Ups Training Underwear for Girls & Boys

Pampers UnderJams Absorbent Night Wear for Girls & Boys

Pampers Splashers

Wipes
=====

-   *Pampers Baby Fresh Wipes*

-   *Pampers Natural Clean Baby Wipes*

-   *Pampers Sensitive Baby Wipes*

Pampers Sensitive Baby Wipes

Pampers Baby Fresh Wipes

Pampers Natural Clean Baby Wipes

Sizing
======

-   *Pampers Swaddlers*

-   *Pampers Baby Dry*

-   *Pampers Cruisers*

-   *Pampers Sensitive*

Pampers Swaddlers

Pampers Baby Dry

Pampers Cruisers

Pampers Sensitive

Feedback
========

-   *In March 2010, Pampers announced a change to their popular Cruisers
    and Swaddlers diapers with the addition of the new Dry-Max
    technology.*

-   *Procter & Gamble claim that pediatric experts have reviewed the
    Pampers with DryMax safety data and have seen no correlation between
    the reported rash and diaper.*

In March 2010, Pampers announced a change to their popular Cruisers and
Swaddlers diapers with the addition of the new Dry-Max technology. Many
parents reported rashes and chemical burns as a result of using the new
diapers. Procter & Gamble claim that pediatric experts have reviewed the
Pampers with DryMax safety data and have seen no correlation between the
reported rash and diaper. In May 2010, a lawsuit was filed against
Procter & Gamble based on the injuries allegedly caused by the diapers.
In September 2010, the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission
issued the results of its investigation into the matter, finding no
evidence that these diapers cause diaper rash.

Advertising
===========

-   *These mailings can include Pampers samples or Pampers Coupons.*

-   *Pampers is marketed in various ways, such as print ads and
    television commercials.*

-   *Pampers has been promoted in some countries on billboards.*

-   *Another way Pampers is promoted is through product placement.*

-   *Pampers paid \$50,000 to be featured in the film Three Men and a
    Baby.*

Pampers is marketed in various ways, such as print ads and television
commercials. Print ads often appear in magazines and other periodicals.
Television commercials appear during soap operas co-produced by Procter
and Gamble, such as Bold and the Beautiful & Young and the Restless, and
during the airing of parenting shows. Another way Pampers is promoted is
through product placement. Pampers paid \$50,000 to be featured in the
film Three Men and a Baby.\[citation needed\] P&G has also sponsored the
program Make Room for Baby on the Discovery Health Channel. Pampers has
been promoted in some countries on billboards. Another method that has
been used to promote the product is direct marketing program where
relevant content is mailed to mothers with babies. These mailings can
include Pampers samples or Pampers Coupons.

P&G contributes to flood relief efforts in Pakistan in part through its
Pampers brand and "Spread a Smile" campaign, which provides free health
check-ups, medicines, and oral rehydration therapy to babies and
children living in the flood affected areas.

Pampers has now also signed the WTA No.1 of the world and honorary
citizen of Bucharest Simona Halep to be the face of their new diaper
brand commercials.

Sponsorships
============

-   *Sesame Street*

-   *Plaza Sésamo*

Sesame Street

Plaza Sésamo

See also
========

-   *Marion Donovan*

Marion Donovan

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Pampers Website*

Pampers Website
