**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pillars%20of%20Creation\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="5.4276312335958in"}\
*The Pillars of Creation in the Eagle Nebula taken by the Hubble
telescope*

Pillars of Creation
===================

-   *The region was rephotographed by ESA's Herschel Space Observatory
    in 2011, and again by the Hubble in 2014 with a newer camera (see
    below).*

-   *Pillars of Creation is a photograph taken by the Hubble Space
    Telescope of elephant trunks of interstellar gas and dust in the
    Eagle Nebula, specifically the Serpens constellation, some
    6,500–7,000 light years from Earth.*

Pillars of Creation is a photograph taken by the Hubble Space Telescope
of elephant trunks of interstellar gas and dust in the Eagle Nebula,
specifically the Serpens constellation, some 6,500–7,000 light years
from Earth. They are so named because the gas and dust are in the
process of creating new stars, while also being eroded by the light from
nearby stars that have recently formed. Taken on April 1, 1995, it was
named one of the top ten photographs from Hubble by Space.com. The
astronomers responsible for the photo were Jeff Hester and Paul Scowen
from Arizona State University. The region was rephotographed by ESA's
Herschel Space Observatory in 2011, and again by the Hubble in 2014 with
a newer camera (see below).

Name
====

-   *In calling the Hubble's spectacular new image of the Eagle Nebula
    the Pillars of Creation, NASA scientists were tapping a rich
    symbolic tradition with centuries of meaning, bringing it into the
    modern age.*

-   *he who created all things, and bears up the pillars of creation."*

-   *As much as we associate pillars with the classical temples of
    Greece and Rome, the concept of the pillars of creation – the very
    foundations that hold up the world and all that is in it –
    reverberates significantly in the Christian tradition.*

The name is based on a phrase used by Charles Spurgeon in his sermon
"The Condescension of Christ":

In calling the Hubble's spectacular new image of the Eagle Nebula the
Pillars of Creation, NASA scientists were tapping a rich symbolic
tradition with centuries of meaning, bringing it into the modern age. As
much as we associate pillars with the classical temples of Greece and
Rome, the concept of the pillars of creation – the very foundations that
hold up the world and all that is in it – reverberates significantly in
the Christian tradition. When William Jennings Bryan published The
World's Famous Orations in 1906, he included an 1857 sermon by London
pastor Charles Haddon Spurgeon titled "The Condescension of Christ". In
it, Spurgeon uses the phrase to convey not only the physical world but
also the force that keeps it all together, emanating from the divine:
"And now wonder, ye angels," Spurgeon says of the birth of Christ, "the
Infinite has become an infant; he, upon whose shoulders the universe
doth hang, hangs at his mother's breast. he who created all things, and
bears up the pillars of creation."

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.951980533683289in"}\
*The Pillars of Creation within the Eagle Nebula (center of photo,
overlaid with the original HST image)*

Composition
===========

-   *EGGs are themselves incubators of new stars.*

-   *The pillars are composed of cool molecular hydrogen and dust that
    are being eroded by photoevaporation from the ultraviolet light of
    relatively close and hot stars.*

-   *The stars then emerge from the EGGs, which then are evaporated.*

The pillars are composed of cool molecular hydrogen and dust that are
being eroded by photoevaporation from the ultraviolet light of
relatively close and hot stars. The leftmost pillar is about four light
years in length. The finger-like protrusions at the top of the clouds
are larger than our solar system, and are made visible by the shadows of
evaporating gaseous globules (EGGs), which shield the gas behind them
from intense UV flux. EGGs are themselves incubators of new stars. The
stars then emerge from the EGGs, which then are evaporated.

Theorized destruction
=====================

-   *Images taken with the Spitzer Space Telescope uncovered a cloud of
    hot dust in the vicinity of the Pillars of Creation that Nicolas
    Flagey accounted to be a shock wave produced by a supernova.*

-   *The appearance of the cloud suggests the supernova shockwave would
    have destroyed the Pillars of Creation 6,000 years ago.*

-   *If this is the case, the Pillars of Creation will undergo a more
    gradual erosion.*

Images taken with the Spitzer Space Telescope uncovered a cloud of hot
dust in the vicinity of the Pillars of Creation that Nicolas Flagey
accounted to be a shock wave produced by a supernova. The appearance of
the cloud suggests the supernova shockwave would have destroyed the
Pillars of Creation 6,000 years ago. Given the distance of roughly 7,000
light years to the Pillars of Creation, this would mean that they have
actually already been destroyed, but because light travels at a finite
speed, this destruction should be visible from Earth in about 1,000
years. However, this interpretation of the hot dust has been disputed by
an astronomer uninvolved in the Spitzer observations, who argues that a
supernova should have resulted in stronger radio and x-ray radiation
than has been observed, and that winds from massive stars could instead
have heated the dust. If this is the case, the Pillars of Creation will
undergo a more gradual erosion.

Photographs
===========

Original Hubble Space Telescope photo
=====================================

-   *Hubble's photo of the pillars is composed of 32 different images
    from four separate cameras in the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2
    on board Hubble.*

-   *The Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 was replaced by the Wide
    Field Camera 3, and the former was taken back to Earth where it is
    displayed in a museum.*

Hubble's photo of the pillars is composed of 32 different images from
four separate cameras in the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 on board
Hubble. The photograph was made with light emitted by different elements
in the cloud and appears as a different color in the composite image:
green for hydrogen, red for singly ionized sulfur and blue for
double-ionized oxygen atoms.

The "stair-shaped" missing part of the picture at the top right corner
originates from the fact that the camera for the top-right quadrant has
a magnified view; when its images are scaled down to match the other
three cameras, there is necessarily a gap in the rest of that quadrant.
This effect is also present on other four-camera Hubble pictures, and
can be displayed at any corner depending on how the image has been
re-oriented for publication.

The Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 was replaced by the Wide Field
Camera 3, and the former was taken back to Earth where it is displayed
in a museum. It was replaced in 2009 as part of a Space Shuttle mission
(STS-125).

Herschel's photo
================

-   *In 2010 Herschel Space Observatory captured a new image of Pillars
    of Creation in far-infrared wavelengths, which allows astronomers to
    look inside the pillars and structures in the region, and come to a
    much fuller understanding of the creative and destructive forces
    inside the Eagle Nebula.*

In 2010 Herschel Space Observatory captured a new image of Pillars of
Creation in far-infrared wavelengths, which allows astronomers to look
inside the pillars and structures in the region, and come to a much
fuller understanding of the creative and destructive forces inside the
Eagle Nebula.

Hubble revisit
==============

-   *The image was photographed by the Hubble Telescope's Wide Field
    Camera 3, installed in 2009, in visible light.*

-   *In celebration of the 25th anniversary since the launch of the
    Hubble Space Telescope, astronomers assembled a larger and
    higher-resolution photograph of the Pillars of Creation which was
    unveiled in January 2015 at the American Astronomical Society
    meeting in Seattle.*

In celebration of the 25th anniversary since the launch of the Hubble
Space Telescope, astronomers assembled a larger and higher-resolution
photograph of the Pillars of Creation which was unveiled in January 2015
at the American Astronomical Society meeting in Seattle. The image was
photographed by the Hubble Telescope's Wide Field Camera 3, installed in
2009, in visible light. An infrared image was also taken.

References
==========
