**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plessy%20v.%20Ferguson\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Plessy v. Ferguson
==================

-   *Plessy is widely regarded as one of the worst decisions in U.S.
    Supreme Court history.*

-   *However, a series of subsequent decisions beginning with the 1954
    case Brown v. Board of Education—which held that the "separate but
    equal" doctrine is unconstitutional in the context of public schools
    and educational facilities—have severely weakened Plessy to the
    point that it is generally considered to have been de facto
    overruled.*

-   *Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896), was a landmark decision of
    the U.S. Supreme Court issued in 1896.*

Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896), was a landmark decision of the
U.S. Supreme Court issued in 1896. It upheld the constitutionality of
racial segregation laws for public facilities as long as the segregated
facilities were equal in quality – a doctrine that came to be known as
"separate but equal". The decision legitimized the many state laws
re-establishing racial segregation that had been passed in the American
South after the end of the Reconstruction Era (1865–1877).

The decision was handed down by a vote of 7 to 1, with the majority
opinion written by Justice Henry Billings Brown and the lone dissent
written by Justice John Marshall Harlan. The Court ruled that the
Louisiana law did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S.
Constitution, stating that although the Fourteenth Amendment established
the legal equality of white and black Americans, it did not and could
not require the elimination of all social or other "distinctions based
upon color". The Court rejected Plessy's lawyers' arguments that the
Louisiana law inherently implied that black people were inferior, and
gave great deference to American state legislatures' inherent power to
make laws regulating health, safety, and morals—the "police power"—and
to determine the reasonableness of the laws they passed.

Plessy is widely regarded as one of the worst decisions in U.S. Supreme
Court history. Despite its infamy, the decision itself has never been
explicitly overruled. However, a series of subsequent decisions
beginning with the 1954 case Brown v. Board of Education—which held that
the "separate but equal" doctrine is unconstitutional in the context of
public schools and educational facilities—have severely weakened Plessy
to the point that it is generally considered to have been de facto
overruled.

Background
==========

-   *In his case, Homer Adolph Plessy v. The State of Louisiana,
    Plessy's lawyers argued that the state law which required East
    Louisiana Railroad to segregate trains had denied him his rights
    under the Thirteenth and Fourteenth amendments of the United States
    Constitution, which provided for equal treatment under the law.*

In 1890, the state of Louisiana passed the Separate Car Act, which
required separate accommodations for blacks and whites on railroads,
including separate railway cars. Concerned, a group of prominent black,
creole, and white New Orleans residents formed the Comité des Citoyens
(Committee of Citizens) dedicated to repeal the law or fight its effect.
They persuaded Homer Plessy, a man of mixed race, to participate in an
orchestrated test case. Plessy was born a free man and was an "octoroon"
(of seven-eighths European descent and one-eighth African descent).
However, under Louisiana law, he was classified as black, and thus
required to sit in the "colored" car.

On June 7, 1892, Plessy bought a first-class ticket at the Press Street
Depot and boarded a "Whites Only" car of the East Louisiana Railroad in
New Orleans, Louisiana, bound for Covington, Louisiana. The railroad
company, which had opposed the law on the grounds that it would require
the purchase of more railcars, had been previously informed of Plessy's
racial lineage, and the intent to challenge the law. Additionally, the
committee hired a private detective with arrest powers to detain Plessy,
to ensure that he would be charged for violating the Separate Car Act,
as opposed to a vagrancy or some other offense. After Plessy took a seat
in the whites-only railway car, he was asked to vacate it, and sit
instead in the blacks-only car. Plessy refused and was arrested
immediately by the detective. As planned, the train was stopped, and
Plessy was taken off the train at Press and Royal streets. Plessy was
remanded for trial in Orleans Parish.

In his case, Homer Adolph Plessy v. The State of Louisiana, Plessy's
lawyers argued that the state law which required East Louisiana Railroad
to segregate trains had denied him his rights under the Thirteenth and
Fourteenth amendments of the United States Constitution, which provided
for equal treatment under the law. However, the judge presiding over his
case, John Howard Ferguson, ruled that Louisiana had the right to
regulate railroad companies while they operated within state boundaries.
Plessy was convicted and sentenced to pay a \$25 fine. Plessy
immediately sought a writ of prohibition.

The Committee of Citizens took Plessy's appeal to the Supreme Court of
Louisiana, where he again found an unreceptive ear, as the state Supreme
Court upheld Judge Ferguson's ruling.

In speaking for the court's decision that Ferguson's judgment did not
violate the 14th Amendment, Louisiana Supreme Court Justice Charles
Fenner cited a number of precedents, including two key cases from
Northern states. The Massachusetts Supreme Court had ruled in
1849—before the 14th amendment—that segregated schools were
constitutional. In answering the charge that segregation perpetuated
race prejudice, the Massachusetts court famously stated: "This
prejudice, if it exists, is not created by law, and probably cannot be
changed by law." The law itself was repealed five years later, but the
precedent stood.

In a Pennsylvania law mandating separate railcars for different races
the Pennsylvania Supreme Court stated: "To assert separateness is not to
declare inferiority ... It is simply to say that following the order of
Divine Providence, human authority ought not to compel these widely
separated races to intermix."

Undaunted, the Committee appealed to the United States Supreme Court in
1896. Two legal briefs were submitted on Plessy's behalf. One was signed
by Albion W. Tourgée and James C. Walker and the other by Samuel F.
Phillips and his legal partner F. D. McKenney. Oral arguments were held
before the Supreme Court on April 13, 1896. Tourgée and Phillips
appeared in the courtroom to speak on behalf of Plessy.\
Tourgée built his case upon violation of Plessy's rights under the
Thirteenth Amendment, prohibiting slavery, and the Fourteenth Amendment,
which guarantees the same rights to all citizens of the United States,
and the equal protection of those rights, against the deprivation of
life, liberty, or property without due process of law. Tourgée argued
that the reputation of being a black man was "property", which, by the
law, implied the inferiority of African Americans as compared to whites.
The state legal brief was prepared by Attorney General Milton Joseph
Cunningham of Natchitoches and New Orleans. Cunningham was a staunch
supporter of white supremacy, who according to a laudatory 1916 obituary
"worked so effectively \[during Reconstruction\] in restoring white
supremacy in politics that he finally was arrested, with fifty-one other
men of that community, and tried by federal officials."

Decision
========

-   *On May 18, 1896, the Supreme Court issued a 7–1 decision against
    Plessy that upheld the constitutionality of Louisiana's train car
    segregation laws.*

On May 18, 1896, the Supreme Court issued a 7–1 decision against Plessy
that upheld the constitutionality of Louisiana's train car segregation
laws. Justice David J. Brewer did not participate in the case because he
had left Washington just before oral arguments to attend to the sudden
death of his daughter.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="3.6666666666666665in" height="5.5in"}\
*Justice Henry Billings Brown, who wrote the majority opinion in Plessy*

Majority
========

-   *Plessy's lawyers had argued that segregation laws inherently
    implied that black people were inferior, and therefore stigmatized
    them with a second-class status that violated the Equal Protection
    Clause.*

-   *The Court rejected this argument:*

-   *According to the Court, the question in any case of racial
    segregation laws like Plessy was whether the law was reasonable, and
    the Court gave great discretion to State legislatures to determine
    the reasonableness of the laws they passed.*

Seven justices formed the Court's majority and joined an opinion written
by Justice Henry Billings Brown. First, the Court dismissed any claim
that the Louisiana law violated the Thirteenth Amendment, which, in the
majority's opinion, did no more than ensure that black Americans had the
basic level of legal equality that was necessary to abolish slavery.

Next, the majority considered whether the law violated the Fourteenth
Amendment's Equal Protection Clause, which reads: "nor shall any State
... deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of
the laws." The Court concluded that although the Fourteenth Amendment
was meant to guarantee legal equality of all races in America, it was
not intended to prevent social or other types of discrimination:

The Court reasoned that laws requiring racial separation were within
Louisiana's police power: the core sovereign authority of U.S. States to
pass laws on matters of "health, safety, and morals". It held that as
long as a law that classified and separated people by their race was a
reasonable and good faith exercise of a State's police power—and was not
designed to oppress a particular class—the law was legal. According to
the Court, the question in any case of racial segregation laws like
Plessy was whether the law was reasonable, and the Court gave great
discretion to State legislatures to determine the reasonableness of the
laws they passed.

Plessy's lawyers had argued that segregation laws inherently implied
that black people were inferior, and therefore stigmatized them with a
second-class status that violated the Equal Protection Clause. The Court
rejected this argument:

The Court rejected the notion that the law marked black Americans with
"a badge of inferiority", and stated that racial prejudice could not be
overcome by legislation.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="4.913333333333333in" height="5.5in"}\
*John Marshall Harlan became known as the "Great Dissenter" for his
fiery dissent in Plessy and other early civil rights cases.*

Dissent
=======

-   *Both Dred Scott and Plessy usually sit at the top of lists of the
    Supreme Court's worst decisions.*

-   *Harlan disagreed with the majority's rejection of Plessy's argument
    that the Louisiana law implied that blacks were inferior, and stated
    that the majority was being willfully ignorant on the subject:*

-   *Harlan's prediction that the decision would eventually become as
    infamous as the Court's decision in the 1857 case Dred Scott v.
    Sandford—in which the Court infamously ruled that black Americans
    could not be citizens under the U.S. Constitution, and that its
    legal protections and privileges could never apply to them—proved to
    be correct.*

Justice John Marshall Harlan was the lone dissenter in the decision, and
authored an opinion in which he harshly criticized the majority's
judgments. Harlan disagreed with the majority's rejection of Plessy's
argument that the Louisiana law implied that blacks were inferior, and
stated that the majority was being willfully ignorant on the subject:

As evidence of this willful ignorance, Harlan pointed out that the
Louisiana law contained an exception for "nurses attending children of
the other race" – this allowed black women who were nannies to white
children to be in the whites-only cars. This demonstrated, in other
words, that a black person could be in the whites-only cars as long as
it was obvious that they were a "social subordinate" or "domestic". In
an eloquent and now well-known passage, Harlan argued that even if many
white Americans of the late 19th century considered themselves socially
superior to Americans of other races, the U.S. Constitution was
"color-blind", and could not permit any classes among citizens in
matters of civil rights.

Harlan's prediction that the decision would eventually become as
infamous as the Court's decision in the 1857 case Dred Scott v.
Sandford—in which the Court infamously ruled that black Americans could
not be citizens under the U.S. Constitution, and that its legal
protections and privileges could never apply to them—proved to be
correct. Both Dred Scott and Plessy usually sit at the top of lists of
the Supreme Court's worst decisions.

Significance
============

-   *Plessy v. Ferguson was never explicitly overruled by the Supreme
    Court, but is effectively dead as a precedent.*

-   *In the case of Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the US Supreme
    Court ruled that segregation in public education was
    unconstitutional.*

-   *The principles of Plessy v. Ferguson were affirmed in Lum v. Rice
    (1927), which upheld the right of a Mississippi public school for
    white children to exclude a Chinese American girl.*

Plessy legitimized the state laws establishing racial segregation in the
South and provided an impetus for further segregation laws. It also
legitimized laws in the North requiring racial segregation as in the
Boston school segregation case noted by Justice Brown in his majority
opinion. Legislative achievements won during the Reconstruction Era were
erased through means of the "separate but equal" doctrine. The doctrine
had been strengthened also by an 1875 Supreme Court decision that
limited the federal government's ability to intervene in state affairs,
guaranteeing to Congress only the power "to restrain states from acts of
racial discrimination and segregation". The ruling basically granted
states legislative immunity when dealing with questions of race,
guaranteeing the states' right to implement racially separate
institutions, requiring them only to be "equal".

The prospect of greater state influence in matters of race worried
numerous advocates of civil equality, including Supreme Court Justice
John Harlan, who wrote in his Plessy dissent, "we shall enter upon an
era of constitutional law, when the rights of freedom and American
citizenship cannot receive from the nation that efficient protection
which heretofore was unhesitatingly accorded to slavery and the rights
of the master." Harlan's concerns about the encroachment on the 14th
Amendment would prove well-founded; states proceeded to institute
segregation-based laws that became known as the Jim Crow system. In
addition, from 1890 to 1908, Southern states passed new or amended
constitutions including provisions that effectively disenfranchised
blacks and thousands of poor whites.

Some commentators, such as Gabriel J. Chin and Eric Maltz, have viewed
Harlan's Plessy dissent in a more critical light, and suggested it be
viewed in context with his other decisions. Maltz has argued that
"modern commentators have often overstated Harlan's distaste for
race-based classifications," pointing to other aspects of decisions in
which Harlan was involved. Both point to a passage of Harlan's Plessy
dissent as particularly troubling:

New Orleans historian Keith Weldon Medley, author of We As Freemen:
Plessy v. Ferguson, The Fight Against Legal Segregation, said the words
in Justice Harlan's "Great Dissent" were taken from papers filed with
the court by "The Citizen's Committee".

The effect of the Plessy ruling was immediate; there were already
significant differences in funding for the segregated school system,
which continued into the 20th century; states consistently underfunded
black schools, providing them with substandard buildings, textbooks, and
supplies. States which had successfully integrated elements of their
society abruptly adopted oppressive legislation that erased
reconstruction era efforts. The principles of Plessy v. Ferguson were
affirmed in Lum v. Rice (1927), which upheld the right of a Mississippi
public school for white children to exclude a Chinese American girl.
Despite the laws enforcing compulsory education, and the lack of public
schools for Chinese children in Lum's area, the Supreme Court ruled that
she had the choice to attend a private school. Jim Crow laws and
practices spread northward in response to a second wave of
African-American migration from the South to northern and midwestern
cities. Some established de jure segregated educational facilities,
separate public institutions such as hotels and restaurants, separate
beaches among other public facilities, and restrictions on interracial
marriage, but in other cases segregation in the North was related to
unstated practices and operated on a de facto basis, although not by
law, among numerous other facets of daily life.

The separate facilities and institutions accorded to the
African-American community were consistently inferior to those provided
to the White community. This contradicted the vague declaration of
"separate but equal" institutions issued after the Plessy decision.

From 1890 to 1908, state legislatures in the South disenfranchised most
blacks and many poor whites through rejecting them for voter
registration and voting: making voter registration more difficult by
providing more detailed records, such as proof of land ownership or
literacy tests administered by white staff at poll stations.
African-American community leaders, who had achieved brief political
success during the Reconstruction era and even into the 1880s, lost
gains made when their voters were excluded from the political system.
Historian Rogers Smith noted on the subject that "lawmakers frequently
admitted, indeed boasted, that such measures as complex registration
rules, literacy and property tests, poll taxes, white primaries, and
grandfather clauses were designed to produce an electorate confined to a
white race that declared itself supreme", notably rejecting the 14th and
15th Amendments to the American Constitution.

In the case of Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the US Supreme Court
ruled that segregation in public education was unconstitutional. Plessy
v. Ferguson was never explicitly overruled by the Supreme Court, but is
effectively dead as a precedent. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited
legal segregation and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 provided for federal
oversight and enforcement of voter registration voting.

Plessy and Ferguson Foundation
==============================

-   *In 2009, Keith Plessy and Phoebe Ferguson, descendants of
    participants on both sides of the 1896 Supreme Court case, announced
    establishing the Plessy and Ferguson Foundation for Education and
    Reconciliation.*

In 2009, Keith Plessy and Phoebe Ferguson, descendants of participants
on both sides of the 1896 Supreme Court case, announced establishing the
Plessy and Ferguson Foundation for Education and Reconciliation. The
foundation will work to create new ways to teach the history of civil
rights through film, art, and public programs designed to create
understanding of this historic case and its effect on the American
conscience.

Plaque at railyard site
=======================

-   *It is Plessy and Ferguson", said Keith Plessy in a radio
    interview.*

-   *"It is no longer Plessy v Ferguson.*

-   *Historians gathered with the Plessy and Ferguson families and a
    member of the Louisiana Supreme Court in New Orleans on February 12,
    2009, to unveil a historical marker to memorialize the case.*

Historians gathered with the Plessy and Ferguson families and a member
of the Louisiana Supreme Court in New Orleans on February 12, 2009, to
unveil a historical marker to memorialize the case. "It is no longer
Plessy v Ferguson. It is Plessy and Ferguson", said Keith Plessy in a
radio interview. The marker was placed on the corner of Press and Royal
Streets, near the location of the former railway station where Plessy
had boarded his train.

See also
========

-   *Brown v. Board of Education*

-   *Loving v. Virginia*

Anticanon

United States constitutional law

Dred Scott

Brown v. Board of Education

Loving v. Virginia

List of 14th amendment cases

Equal Protection Clause

References
==========

Footnotes
=========

Works cited
===========

External links
==============

-   *Newspaper articles and clippings about Plessy v. Ferguson at
    Newspapers.com*

-   *Works related to Plessy v. Ferguson at Wikisource*

-   *Plessy v. Ferguson from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme
    Court Decisions*

-   *Text of Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896) is available from:
     Cornell  CourtListener  Findlaw  Google Scholar  Justia  Library of
    Congress*

-   *Plessy & Ferguson Foundation*

-   *Plessy v. Ferguson from the Library of Congress*

Works related to Plessy v. Ferguson at Wikisource

Text of Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537 (1896) is available from:
 Cornell  CourtListener  Findlaw  Google Scholar  Justia  Library of
Congress 

Plessy v. Ferguson from the Library of Congress

Plessy & Ferguson Foundation

Plessy v. Ferguson from C-SPAN's Landmark Cases: Historic Supreme Court
Decisions

Newspaper articles and clippings about Plessy v. Ferguson at
Newspapers.com
