**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Political%20positions%20of%20Gary%20Johnson\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Political positions of Gary Johnson
===================================

-   *Gary Johnson was the governor of New Mexico from 1995 to 2003 and
    ran for president in 2012 and 2016.*

-   *The Libertarian National Convention in May, 2012 chose Johnson as
    the party's candidate.*

-   *Johnson is known for having a philosophy of limited government with
    "fiscally-conservative but socially-progressive views."*

Gary Johnson was the governor of New Mexico from 1995 to 2003 and ran
for president in 2012 and 2016. In December 2011 he announced he would
pursue the presidential nomination of the Libertarian Party for the 2012
general election. The Libertarian National Convention in May, 2012 chose
Johnson as the party's candidate. In November 2014, Johnson announced he
would pursue the presidential nomination of the Libertarian Party for
the 2016 general election. Johnson has taken positions on many political
issues as revealed through his public comments, his gubernatorial
record, his Our America Initiative and his campaigns to win the
Republican and Libertarian nominations.

Johnson is known for having a philosophy of limited government with
"fiscally-conservative but socially-progressive views." These are
sometimes described as fiscally conservative, pro-civil liberties, and
non-interventionist, especially as in opposition to a large military and
foreign wars.

Economic issues
===============

-   *According to a survey of National Association for Business
    Economics (NABE) members, 15% of business economists feel that
    Johnson would do the best job as president of managing the U.S.
    economy (with 55% choosing Clinton, 14% choosing Trump, and 15%
    saying that they did not know or did not have an opinion).*

According to a survey of National Association for Business Economics
(NABE) members, 15% of business economists feel that Johnson would do
the best job as president of managing the U.S. economy (with 55%
choosing Clinton, 14% choosing Trump, and 15% saying that they did not
know or did not have an opinion).

Budget, deficits
================

-   *Johnson supports amending the U.S. Constitution to require an
    annual balanced budget.*

-   *Gary Johnson has said that the United States is heading toward an
    economic crisis similar to the 1998 Russian financial crisis, and
    that it can be stopped only by balancing the federal budget.*

-   *Johnson opposes earmarks, and would veto any bills containing
    them.*

Gary Johnson has said that the United States is heading toward an
economic crisis similar to the 1998 Russian financial crisis, and that
it can be stopped only by balancing the federal budget. As such, he
promised to submit a balanced budget for the year 2013 and promises to
veto any bills containing expenditures in excess of revenues. He
promises to look at every decision as a cost-benefit analysis. His
budget would cut federal expenditures by 43% in every area, "across the
board," including "responsible entitlement reform," because the "math is
simple: federal spending must be cut not by or billions, but by
trillions." He calls the notion "that we can control spending and
balance the budget without reforming Medicare, Medicaid and Social
Security" "lunacy". Johnson supports amending the U.S. Constitution to
require an annual balanced budget. Johnson opposes earmarks, and would
veto any bills containing them.

Johnson did not support the Troubled Asset Relief Program, the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, the Tax Relief, Unemployment
Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010, or any other
"bailout" or "stimulus" bills, and opposes President Barack Obama's
proposed American Jobs Act. He has said that the federal spending in
these laws is wasteful and ineffectual, and calls them "bloated." He
once quipped, "My next-door neighbor's two dogs have created more shovel
ready jobs than this current administration."

Johnson supports ending the federal personal and corporate income tax
system and replacing it with the FairTax reform proposal (while
systematically reducing these taxes to near-zero levels), a national
consumption tax on new goods and services. He believes the FairTax would
"reboot" the American economy without impacting those at or under the
poverty level, who would not be subject to it. He believes that
abolishing the federal corporate income tax, which he says is the second
highest in the world, would create tens of millions of jobs immediately.
Due to his stance on taxes, David Weigel described him as "the original
Tea Party candidate".

Employment
==========

-   *Johnson believes the main remedy for unemployment is reducing
    taxation and regulation on private business, pointing to his record
    on budgetary reform, tax reform, immigration reform, and the
    environment as ending economic uncertainty.*

Johnson believes the main remedy for unemployment is reducing taxation
and regulation on private business, pointing to his record on budgetary
reform, tax reform, immigration reform, and the environment as ending
economic uncertainty. He does not believe that government can actually
create jobs, but instead that it can encourage private business, which
in turn creates jobs.

Energy
======

-   *Johnson favors building new coal-fired and nuclear power plants.*

Johnson favors building new coal-fired and nuclear power plants. He
supports private sector research and development of renewable energy,
but does not believe that the government should subsidize it.

Environment
===========

-   *Johnson has stated that the best environmental practices are due to
    a good economy.*

-   *Johnson has stated that he will not "compromise when it comes to
    clean air, clean land, or clean water."*

-   *Johnson has signed the Western Governors' Association resolution,
    which aims at "collaborative, incentive driven, locally-based
    solutions."*

Johnson has stated that the best environmental practices are due to a
good economy. He says "America needs to be a land with a clean
environment," and supports "clean-air and clean-water action and
believe\[s\] in conservationism." He cites the Environmental Protection
Agency as an example of good government.

Although he has stated he agrees that human carbon emissions do impact
the climate, Johnson rejects government action to control or limit it -
including cap and trade - as ineffective. "When you look at the amount
of money we are looking to spend on global warming — in the trillions —
and look at the result, I just argue that the result is completely
inconsequential to the money we would end up spending," he said. "We can
direct those moneys to other ways that would be much more beneficial to
mankind." Johnson has signed the Western Governors' Association
resolution, which aims at "collaborative, incentive driven,
locally-based solutions."

Johnson has advocated for free market solutions to environmental
problems, stating: "In a healthy economy that allows the market to
function unimpeded, consumers, innovators and personal choices will
ultimately bring about the environmental restoration and protection
society desires,". Although he briefly considered being "open also to
the notion of a carbon tax," Johnson quickly retreated from a carbon
tax.

Johnson has stated that he will not "compromise when it comes to clean
air, clean land, or clean water." Johnson supports nuclear energy and
fossil fuels, but has explicitly stated that the government has a role
to protect Americans against businesses that would harm human health or
property, including environmental harm.

Federal Reserve
===============

-   *Johnson has said the Federal Reserve "needs to be reviewed and
    managed effectively" by congressionally auditing it, and that its
    actions "should be transparent".*

-   *Johnson opposes quantitative easing, which he says is merely
    "printing money and buying debt," and which he believes causes
    "malinvestment, inflation, and prolonged unemployment."*

Johnson has said the Federal Reserve "needs to be reviewed and managed
effectively" by congressionally auditing it, and that its actions
"should be transparent". He has stated that Congress should "take a
close look at how the Federal Reserve Bank is operated and regulated. If
changes need to be made within the Federal Reserve Bank, they should be
made."

He says, "We need to know where the money that is being printed is
going," such as "the extent to which the Fed has purchased private
assets at home and abroad." He blames high inflation on the lack of
transparency in the Federal Reserve. Johnson opposes quantitative
easing, which he says is merely "printing money and buying debt," and
which he believes causes "malinvestment, inflation, and prolonged
unemployment." He also states that he would not veto a bill that would
end the Federal Reserve.

While Johnson supported ending the Federal Reserve when questioned about
the issue in an online town hall, Johnson only mentions three reforms of
the Federal Reserve on his website: "Conduct an audit to provide true
transparency of the Federal Reserve's lending practices", "Establish
clear Congressional oversight", and "Get the Federal Reserve out of the
business of printing money and buying debt through quantitative easing."
In a YouTube interview, he says, "The Federal Reserve's original mandate
was price stability. Added on to that was unemployment, or \[rather\]
employment, which I think are at odds with one another. \[The\] Federal
Reserve and central banks should be about a strong U.S. dollar and not a
weak U.S. dollar. That's what we have. We have zero percent interest
rates, because let's face it. If we didn't have zero percent interest
rates right now we would be in the midst of that monetary collapse
because of the debt that Americans hold and can't repay." Gary also has
stated that the Federal Reserve is not a private entity. "We own the
Federal Reserve. There is this misconception that the Federal Reserve is
a private entity."\[citation needed\]

Free-market capitalism
======================

-   *Johnson supports free markets and free-market capitalist
    economics.*

-   *He opposes government subsidies to business; he believes they
    wrongly "pick winners and losers," which he says is the consumer's
    job, not the government's.*

Johnson supports free markets and free-market capitalist economics. He
says, "Free markets and limited government are the foundation of
prosperity." He believes government should foster the free market by
allowing businesses freedom to compete without restrictions. He opposes
government subsidies to business; he believes they wrongly "pick winners
and losers," which he says is the consumer's job, not the government's.

Trade
=====

-   *Johnson supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership, TPP.*

-   *Johnson supports free trade and opposes tariffs, "period."*

Johnson supports free trade and opposes tariffs, "period." He believes
free market trade corrects inequities between trading partners, such as
foreign countries' subsidies for certain industries. Johnson supports
the Trans-Pacific Partnership, TPP.

Health care
===========

-   *Johnson believes that the "costs of health care are out of control
    and something needs to be done to return health care to fiscal
    solvency."*

-   *Johnson opposed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and
    believes it should be repealed.*

Johnson believes that the "costs of health care are out of control and
something needs to be done to return health care to fiscal solvency." He
does "not believe that government should be taking over the health care
system." Instead, he believes that a "market-based approach should be
the foundation of any solution. A health care insurance system that is
privately owned and managed is the best approach to solving our health
care problems." He favors tort reform and control of frivolous lawsuits
as means cutting costs of health care.

Johnson opposed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, and
believes it should be repealed. He also opposed the Medicare
Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act, which he calls
"the failed Medicare prescription drug plan," and believes it should be
repealed.

Labor unions
============

-   *Johnson says his only issue with trade unions, including teachers'
    unions, is that they require both good and bad workers to be treated
    the same.*

Johnson says his only issue with trade unions, including teachers'
unions, is that they require both good and bad workers to be treated the
same. He believes businesses should be allowed to reward good workers
and fire bad workers, without collective intervention. He views
public-sector unions that contribute to political campaigns as
"dangerous."

Social Security and Medicare
============================

-   *Johnson believes in continuing Social Security and Medicare for
    people who have already paid into the system because "there are
    people in need," and "government is the only entity able to provide
    in some cases."*

-   *Johnson believes that funding for Social Security and Medicare
    should not come from payroll taxes, but instead should be funded out
    of revenues from the FairTax.*

-   *Johnson says Social Security is valuable and is fixable without
    raising taxes.*

Johnson believes in continuing Social Security and Medicare for people
who have already paid into the system because "there are people in
need," and "government is the only entity able to provide in some
cases." But he believes in what he calls enacting "responsible
entitlement reform," because the notion "that we can control spending
and balance the budget without reforming Medicare, Medicaid and Social
Security" is "lunacy."

Johnson says Social Security is valuable and is fixable without raising
taxes. He wants "Social Security to reflect today's realities without
breaking trust with retirees." He supports raising the retirement age,
multi-pronged means testing for Social Security recipients, and changing
the escalator built into Social Security from the wage index to the
inflation rate. He wants Congress to investigate privatizing part or all
of Social Security with the goal being that the investment of
contributions could be self-directed.

He would block grant the remaining funds to the states to control all
aspects of their own Medicaid and Medicare programs, making for "50
laboratories of innovation" from which best practices would emerge and
eventually be duplicated. He believes the states will "innovate, find
efficiencies and provide better service at lower cost." He says
"common-sense cost savings" will place Medicare and Medicaid "on a path
toward long-term solvency."

Johnson believes that funding for Social Security and Medicare should
not come from payroll taxes, but instead should be funded out of
revenues from the FairTax.

Military and foreign policy
===========================

-   *During the Iraq War, Johnson called for the end of U.S. military
    involvement in Iraq and Libya.*

-   *Johnson believes it "is important to have a strong defense both at
    home and abroad," and that the "military should remain the most
    potent force for good on Earth," but believes the greatest threat to
    national security at present is that "we're bankrupt."*

-   *Johnson says the United States "should resort to military action as
    the last option and only as provided in the Constitution."*

Johnson believes it "is important to have a strong defense both at home
and abroad," and that the "military should remain the most potent force
for good on Earth," but believes the greatest threat to national
security at present is that "we're bankrupt." He would include a 43% cut
to the military's budget in his proposed balanced budget by
concentrating on defense, rather than offense. He has stated: "When you
talk about a 43 percent reduction in military spending, that's going
back to 2003 funding levels, not the end of the world". He advocates
making "better use of military alliances which allow greater sharing of
the human and financial burdens at less cost of protecting national
interests."

Johnson says the United States "should resort to military action as the
last option and only as provided in the Constitution." He believes the
continuing American military presence in Europe, in Japan and in South
Korea should be reduced by at least 43%, and that the United States
should end its military involvements in Afghanistan immediately. During
the Iraq War, Johnson called for the end of U.S. military involvement in
Iraq and Libya. He would propose cuts to the military's uniformed and
civilian personnel, research and development, intelligence, and nuclear
weapons, all of which would be "carefully considered" rather than
"across the board." He supports reducing the U.S. nuclear arsenal,
saying, "Do we really need to blow up the world 23 times over, or would
eight times be sufficient?" Because Johnson has talked about
humanitarian interventions, many libertarians have questioned if he is
as committed to noninterventionism as congressman Ron Paul, who was
running for president as a Republican.

Johnson said in an April 2012 Daily Caller interview that he favors
withdrawing or reducing American forces in Europe and East Asia, but not
necessarily the Middle East. He also said he stood by comments to the
Weekly Standard that he might support waging war for humanitarian
reasons, saying he would not "sit idly by and watch something like the
Holocaust go down." He also stated that while he thought drone attacks
create more enemies than they kill, he would not necessarily stop the
drone attacks in Pakistan or Yemen, leaving all options on the table.

Non-state terrorism
===================

-   *Johnson says the United States "should be protected from terrorism
    and those that attack America should be brought to justice quickly
    and efficiently," and believes it "should be proactive in such
    matters."*

-   *Though Johnson believes the practice of holding persons at
    Guantanamo Bay without charge or hearing should end, he does not
    necessarily favor closing the detention camp there.*

Johnson says the United States "should be protected from terrorism and
those that attack America should be brought to justice quickly and
efficiently," and believes it "should be proactive in such matters." He
opposed the USA PATRIOT Act, and has said that it should be allowed to
expire.

Johnson opposes "physical or psychological torture" for any "criminal or
terrorist suspect captured by the U.S." He believes that "individuals
incarcerated unjustly by the U.S.," "whether at Guantanamo Bay or
elsewhere," "should have the ability to seek compensation through the
courts," "must be given due process via the courts or military
tribunals, and must not be held indefinitely without regard to those
fundamental processes."

Though Johnson believes the practice of holding persons at Guantanamo
Bay without charge or hearing should end, he does not necessarily favor
closing the detention camp there. He says that, even if it were closed,
there would have to be "some facility somewhere" like it to hold enemy
combatants. Johnson has said that trying enemy combatants by military
tribunal is "a fair way to go about trying these individuals" that does
not infringe on their civil liberties.

ISIS
====

-   *Johnson favors a declaration of war by the United States against
    the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, and believes the U.S.
    strategy against the group ought be to "continue to knock ISIS
    out".*

Johnson favors a declaration of war by the United States against the
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, and believes the U.S. strategy
against the group ought be to "continue to knock ISIS out".

Afghanistan
===========

-   *On April 9, 2012, Johnson told The Daily Caller that while he would
    withdraw military forces, he would not rule out putting U.S.
    military bases in Afghanistan.*

-   *Johnson initially supported the war in Afghanistan as a response to
    the September 11 attacks, reasoning "We were attacked, and we
    attacked back."*

Johnson initially supported the war in Afghanistan as a response to the
September 11 attacks, reasoning "We were attacked, and we attacked
back." However, he opposes continued military involvement in
Afghanistan, stating that "after being in Afghanistan for six months I
think we effectively wiped out al Qaeda." He also believes the United
States "should not be borrowing money to build roads, bridges, schools
and other infrastructure in foreign countries, especially when such help
is currently needed at home. Non-military foreign aid around the world
is something we cannot currently afford." On April 9, 2012, Johnson told
The Daily Caller that while he would withdraw military forces, he would
not rule out putting U.S. military bases in Afghanistan.

Iraq
====

-   *Johnson opposed the Iraq War since its beginning, and called for
    the American presence in Iraq to end.*

Johnson opposed the Iraq War since its beginning, and called for the
American presence in Iraq to end. He says that because "Saddam Hussein
has been out of power in Iraq for nearly eight years," American troops
"must leave so Iraq can have a chance to grow into a responsible member
of the world community."

Israel
======

-   *While running as a Republican, Johnson stated that he "supports the
    right of Israel to exist as a sovereign country and believes that
    the United States should protect that right militarily if needed."*

While running as a Republican, Johnson stated that he "supports the
right of Israel to exist as a sovereign country and believes that the
United States should protect that right militarily if needed." He also
said that Israel is an important ally, and that America's military
alliance with Israel should be maintained, but that he opposes financial
aid to Israel, as he does to all countries, although he has since stated
he favors the continuation of "strategic aid" to Israel. He has said he
would not follow Israel or any other ally into a war that it had
initiated.

Iran
====

-   *However, Johnson opposed the Iran deal on the grounds that Iran is
    "the number one financier of terror around the world."*

-   *During his 2012 Libertarian Party campaign he stated that he does
    not believe Iran is a military threat and would use all his
    presidential power to prevent Israel from attacking Iran.*

-   *Johnson told the Daily Caller that the United States has not
    engaged Iran diplomatically in a serious manner.*

Johnson told the Daily Caller that the United States has not engaged
Iran diplomatically in a serious manner. He would remind them that if
"Iran launches a nuclear warhead they can be assured that they will no
longer exist" and that the attack "will be from Israel." He also would
offer to open up trade with Iran. During his 2012 Libertarian Party
campaign he stated that he does not believe Iran is a military threat
and would use all his presidential power to prevent Israel from
attacking Iran. However, Johnson opposed the Iran deal on the grounds
that Iran is "the number one financier of terror around the world."

Libya
=====

-   *Johnson opposed U.S. involvement in the Libyan Civil War.*

Johnson opposed U.S. involvement in the Libyan Civil War. He believes
there is no "clear goal for our military actions in Libya," and dislikes
that "the American people are footing the bill" for military operations
there.

NATO
====

-   *Johnson supports U.S. membership of NATO, arguing the U.S. must
    "honor our treaty obligations".*

Johnson supports U.S. membership of NATO, arguing the U.S. must "honor
our treaty obligations".

North Korea
===========

-   *Johnson believes that North Korea should be taken seriously,
    because at some point their intercontinental ballistic missiles
    "will work," but that their conventional forces are not a threat to
    the US.*

Johnson believes that North Korea should be taken seriously, because at
some point their intercontinental ballistic missiles "will work," but
that their conventional forces are not a threat to the US. He has stated
that conventional US troops should no longer be based in South Korea,
and that the U.S. must cooperate diplomatically with China to push to
disarm North Korea's nuclear weapons.

Uganda
======

-   *In April 2012, Johnson stated he supported the United States'
    efforts to aid African troops in tracking down Lord's Resistance
    Army leader Joseph Kony who heads what he called arguably "the worst
    terrorist group that's been on the planet for the last 20 years."*

In April 2012, Johnson stated he supported the United States' efforts to
aid African troops in tracking down Lord's Resistance Army leader Joseph
Kony who heads what he called arguably "the worst terrorist group that's
been on the planet for the last 20 years." He stated that although
Congress had passed legislation authorizing U.S. intervention, signed by
Obama, and that in such case "I would have had plans to immediately ask
for a volunteer force and gone in and wipe 'em out."

Cuba
====

-   *Johnson does not oppose charter flights to Cuba.*

Johnson does not oppose charter flights to Cuba.

Ukraine
=======

-   *In 2014, following the Russian annexation of Crimea and amidst
    pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine, Johnson expressed the opinion that
    the United States should not get involved in Ukraine due to a lack
    of risk to American national security.*

In 2014, following the Russian annexation of Crimea and amidst
pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine, Johnson expressed the opinion that the
United States should not get involved in Ukraine due to a lack of risk
to American national security. He stated that U.S. involvement in
Ukraine "would be like Russia getting involved in the affairs of Puerto
Rico."

Syria
=====

-   *Johnson believes that the best course of action in regards to the
    humanitarian crisis in Syria should be handled not militarily, but
    diplomatically.*

Johnson believes that the best course of action in regards to the
humanitarian crisis in Syria should be handled not militarily, but
diplomatically. He has expressed disagreement with the United States
supporting both the Kurds and the Free Syrian Army.

Structure of government
=======================

Campaign finance regulation
===========================

-   *In 2012, Johnson suggested that he would support the consideration
    of a public financing system for federal campaigns if elected.*

-   *Johnson believes the only necessary campaign finance reform is a
    mandate of "100% transparency."*

Johnson supports the 2010 Citizens United Supreme Court decision, which
allows corporations to spend money to persuade voters without restraint,
"I think it comes under the First Amendment, that they should be able to
contribute as much money as they want." "Yes, any restriction on
campaign spending violates the first amendment."

Johnson believes the only necessary campaign finance reform is a mandate
of "100% transparency."

In 2012, Johnson suggested that he would support the consideration of a
public financing system for federal campaigns if elected. However, in
2016, he expressed opposition to a public financing system for federal
campaigns.

Civil liberties
===============

-   *Johnson has stated that he would pardon NSA whistleblower Edward
    Snowden.*

-   *Johnson believes the "government should protect the value of
    individuals and their civil liberties" and "should not intervene in
    the private lives of individual citizens unnecessarily.*

-   *Johnson opposes the USA PATRIOT Act, and believes it should be
    allowed to expire.*

Johnson believes the "government should protect the value of individuals
and their civil liberties" and "should not intervene in the private
lives of individual citizens unnecessarily. Personal liberty and freedom
from unwarranted governmental control or regulation should allow
law-abiding individuals to pursue their own desires as long as they are
not causing harm to other people." He believes the role of government is
to "protect us from individuals who might or do us harm," but "should be
out of our lives for the most part." He believes "our civil liberties
are being eroded" and that Americans are "giving up \[their\] civil
rights in the name of fear."

Johnson opposes the USA PATRIOT Act, and believes it should be allowed
to expire. He believes this would "restore proper judicial oversight to
federal investigations and again require federal investigators to prove
probable cause prior to executing a search." Johnson says "habeas corpus
should be respected entirely, requiring the government to either charge
incarcerated individuals with a crime or be released." Johnson has
stated that he would pardon NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden.

Johnson supports private alternatives to the TSA, which he says "should
take a risk-based approach to airport security. Only high-risk
individuals should be subjected to invasive pat-downs and full-body
scans." He believes non-government airport screeners "can be held fully
accountable for their successes and failures."

Gun rights
==========

-   *Johnson says that the Second Amendment "was designed to protect us
    against a government that could be very intrusive.*

-   *Johnson would, however, limit weapons such as rocket launchers.*

-   *Johnson believes that allowing the concealed carrying of guns
    reduces crime and gun violence.*

-   *At the same event, Johnson said that he was "open to ...
    discussions" on the topic of "keeping guns out of the hands of the
    mentally ill."*

Johnson opposes federal and state gun control legislation, saying: "I'm
a firm believer in the Second Amendment and so I would not have signed
legislation banning assault weapons or automatic weapons." Johnson says
that the Second Amendment "was designed to protect us against a
government that could be very intrusive. And in this country, we have a
growing police state - if people can own assault rifles or automatic
rifles, I think leads to a more civil government." Johnson would,
however, limit weapons such as rocket launchers. Johnson believes that
allowing the concealed carrying of guns reduces crime and gun violence.
He opposes barring gun sales to individuals on the no-fly list, because
he claims that such lists have a high error rate.

At a June 2016 town-hall event, Johnson has called for a
"thousand-person taskforce" or "hot line" to prevent terrorists from
obtaining guns, and has questioned why the perpetrator of the Orlando
nightclub shooting was not "deprived of his guns" after being
interviewed three times. At the same event, Johnson said that he was
"open to ... discussions" on the topic of "keeping guns out of the hands
of the mentally ill."

Eminent domain
==============

-   *Johnson opposes using the eminent domain power to benefit private
    entities.*

Johnson opposes using the eminent domain power to benefit private
entities.

States' rights
==============

-   *Johnson says, "After great deliberation, the Founders clearly based
    the blueprint for our government on the fundamental idea that there
    must be strict constraints on Federal power—an idea from which we
    have strayed much too far."*

-   *He believes "that the proper balance needs to be restored between
    the different branches of government," which "includes the rights of
    states."*

Johnson says, "After great deliberation, the Founders clearly based the
blueprint for our government on the fundamental idea that there must be
strict constraints on Federal power—an idea from which we have strayed
much too far." He believes "that the proper balance needs to be restored
between the different branches of government," which "includes the
rights of states."

Judicial appointments
=====================

-   *Johnson promises to appoint only those judges who will interpret
    the Constitution as intended by the framers, and that the amendment
    process should be followed when changes are necessary.*

-   *He believes that any "court decision that does not follow this
    original meaning of the Constitution should be revisited."*

Johnson promises to appoint only those judges who will interpret the
Constitution as intended by the framers, and that the amendment process
should be followed when changes are necessary. He believes that any
"court decision that does not follow this original meaning of the
Constitution should be revisited."

Social policy
=============

-   *Johnson has stated, "I am not a social conservative in any way,
    shape, or form."*

Johnson has stated, "I am not a social conservative in any way, shape,
or form." He believes the majority of Republicans are not social
conservatives, but rather are fiscal conservatives. He says he respects
and understands socially conservative beliefs, but he has a difference
of opinion. He says Republicans come together over fiscal issues, which
are his primary concern.

Abortion
========

-   *Johnson supports "a woman's right to choose up until the point of
    viability" and wants to keep abortion legal.*

Johnson supports "a woman's right to choose up until the point of
viability" and wants to keep abortion legal. He has been very vocal in
his beliefs. He does, however, support legislation banning late-term and
partial-birth abortions as well as mandatory parental notification for
minors seeking an abortion. He has spoken strongly and frequently in
favor of "a woman's right to choose," further insisting that the
decision to solicit an abortion or carry a pregnancy to term "is best
left to women and families, not the government."

Crime
=====

-   *Johnson believes that crimes "committed online," including "fraud
    and child pornography," "should be investigated and treated
    identically as crimes not committed online."*

-   *Johnson asserts that much of the violent crime in the United States
    stems from the failure of the federal drug policy of the United
    States, just as occurred with the prohibition of alcohol between
    1920 and 1933.*

Johnson asserts that much of the violent crime in the United States
stems from the failure of the federal drug policy of the United States,
just as occurred with the prohibition of alcohol between 1920 and 1933.
He says, "Since only criminal gangs and cartels are willing to take the
risks associated with large-scale black market distribution, the War on
Drugs has made a lot of dangerous people and organizations very rich and
very powerful." He says that, like alcohol prohibition, prohibition of
drugs creates "overdose deaths, gang violence, and other
prohibition-related harm." He points to his views on ending the War on
Drugs as a remedy for most violent crime in America.

Johnson believes that crimes "committed online," including "fraud and
child pornography," "should be investigated and treated identically as
crimes not committed online."

Death penalty
=============

-   *Johnson opposes the death penalty completely.*

Johnson opposes the death penalty completely. Initially, as Governor of
New Mexico, he had sought to expand capital sentences to minors, while
limiting appeals; he now calls that position "naïve." He believes
government inevitably "makes mistakes with regard to the death penalty,"
and does not "want to put one innocent person to death to punish 99 who
are guilty."

Drinking age
============

-   *Johnson is in favor of lowering the legal drinking age to 18, or
    eliminating the drinking age outright; "I just believe that the
    lower the age the better you come to grips with what these
    substances are...*

-   *Current federal legislation mandates that states adopt laws
    prohibiting the sale of alcohol to individuals under 21 years old.*

-   *If states do not comply, they risk losing federal transportation
    funding.*

Johnson is in favor of lowering the legal drinking age to 18, or
eliminating the drinking age outright; "I just believe that the lower
the age the better you come to grips with what these substances are...
If you can go to Iraq and die, or Afghanistan and die as a service man
or women at 18, and you can't drink — I'm sorry I don't buy into that."

Current federal legislation mandates that states adopt laws prohibiting
the sale of alcohol to individuals under 21 years old. If states do not
comply, they risk losing federal transportation funding.

Drug policy
===========

-   *However, Johnson believes that the War on Drugs has not been
    successful, and should be ended.*

-   *Johnson does not advocate outright legalization of other drugs.*

-   *Johnson says his drug policy is "Don't do drugs."*

-   *Johnson believes that marijuana should be legalized, regulated, and
    taxed, "just like tobacco."*

Johnson says his drug policy is "Don't do drugs." He believes drugs are
"harmful, addictive and destructive to our lives and society." He
believes the same about alcohol, and has not had a drink in decades.

However, Johnson believes that the War on Drugs has not been successful,
and should be ended. Concerning marijuana, he "believes it is insane to
arrest roughly 800,000 people a year for choosing to use a natural
substance that is, by any reasonable objective standard, less harmful
than alcohol, a drug that is advertised at every major sporting event."
He compares present-day prohibition of drugs to the failed alcohol
prohibition in the 1920s. He says "90% of the drug problem is
prohibition-related, not use-related."

Johnson believes that marijuana should be legalized, regulated, and
taxed, "just like tobacco." But he promises "it will never be legal for
a person to smoke marijuana, become impaired, and get behind the wheel
of a car or otherwise do harm to others, and it will never be legal for
kids to smoke marijuana." If elected, he would de-schedule marijuana by
executive order. He says this "would lead to a lower price for the
product and eliminate the criminal element from its distribution, much
like the repeal of the prohibition of alcohol many decades back."

Johnson does not advocate outright legalization of other drugs. Instead,
he believes other drugs should be treated as a health problem rather
than a criminal justice problem. He believes these steps will lessen
crime in the United States, help balance the budget, increase the
quality of courts and prisons, and protect civil liberties.

Education
=========

-   *Johnson believes there is a higher education bubble, and blames it
    on federal student loan programs.*

-   *Johnson believes that block-granting education funds to the states
    without strings, thereby returning all control of education to the
    states, is the best choice, because it would create "50 laboratories
    of innovation" from which best practices would emerge.*

-   *On the state level, Johnson believes in school choice.*

On the state level, Johnson believes in school choice. As governor of
New Mexico, he sought to implement a school voucher system, which he
believes would transform public education into a more "effective"
system.

On the federal level, Johnson believes the Department of Education
should be abolished because federal control of state education funding
negatively affects the states: he claims that 11 cents out of every
dollar states spent on education comes from the Department of Education,
but accepting the money comes with 16 cents of "strings attached."
Johnson believes that block-granting education funds to the states
without strings, thereby returning all control of education to the
states, is the best choice, because it would create "50 laboratories of
innovation" from which best practices would emerge. He believes that the
No Child Left Behind Act and other "federal mandates" create a
"terrible" system of education, and believes they should be repealed. He
says that a "homogenous" national education system does not work.

Johnson believes there is a higher education bubble, and blames it on
federal student loan programs. He believes the government should not be
"in the student loan business." Instead, he supports a free market in
education as a remedy to the bubble.

Immigration
===========

-   *Johnson believes two approaches to immigration should be
    implemented: (1) "simplify legal immigration" and (2) "tackle
    illegal immigration."*

-   *Johnson opposed Arizona SB 1070, and says he would have vetoed it
    were he the governor, though he understands and supports the spirit
    behind it.*

-   *Johnson does not support immigration quotas.*

Johnson believes two approaches to immigration should be implemented:
(1) "simplify legal immigration" and (2) "tackle illegal immigration."
He says, "Immigration into the United States by ambitious, willing
workers and their families is a good thing. Not only is it a historical
and energizing part of American culture and experience, it is vital to
our economy. These positive benefits should not be sacrificed or reduced
in any solution to stop illegal immigration."

Johnson favors issuing work visas, rather than granting amnesty
citizenship or permanent residency, to people who want to work in the
United States so that they pay payroll and income taxes, and favors a
two-year grace period to current illegal immigrants to obtain these
visas. He would require background checks of visa applicants, because
federal "authorities do need to know who is crossing our borders and be
able to prevent criminals from entering the country." He believes that,
once a worker obtains a visa, the worker "should have access to the
normal procedures for gaining permanent status and citizenship, and
should be able to bring their families to the U.S. after demonstrating
ability to support them financially." Johnson does not support
immigration quotas.

Under the present system, Johnson does not support "cracking down" on
illegal immigration or creating penalties for businesses that hire
undocumented immigrants. Instead, he believes the work visa program will
reduce illegal immigration. But once the program is implemented, he
believes in enforcing "a 'one strike, you're out' rule for immigrants
who circumvent the" work visa process, as well as imposing and enforcing
"sanctions on employers for noncompliance with immigration laws.

Johnson opposes building a fence or wall along the Mexican border or
placing National Guard units there, because "security measures along the
borders are just not enough" and "do not completely solve the
immigration problem." He believes that much of the Mexican–American
border problems are due to drug prohibition, and that ending the
prohibition of marijuana and the War on Drugs would end 75% of the
violence along the border.

Johnson opposed Arizona SB 1070, and says he would have vetoed it were
he the governor, though he understands and supports the spirit behind
it. He says that the bill was devastating to drawing business to Arizona
and believes the bill will create racial discrimination.

Internet issues
===============

-   *Under the existing tax system, Johnson does not support taxing
    internet sales.*

-   *Johnson believes the Internet "should remain independent,
    accessible and market-based."*

-   *Johnson opposes any censoring of political speech online, and
    believes that "online gambling should be legal for adults."*

Johnson believes the Internet "should remain independent, accessible and
market-based." He also opposes government subsidies to Internet service
providers. Additionally, he opposes FCC "rules regulating content,
Internet speeds, and pricing for services," because the "government
should not be in the business of picking winners and losers in the
content marketplace."

Under the existing tax system, Johnson does not support taxing internet
sales. He says, "The Internet has flourished and society has benefited
immeasurably because it has remained relatively free of taxation. The
moratorium on access and service taxation must be made permanent."

Johnson opposes any censoring of political speech online, and believes
that "online gambling should be legal for adults."

LGBT issues
===========

-   *Formerly a supporter of civil unions for same-sex couples, on
    December 1, 2011, Johnson voiced his support for same-sex marriage.*

-   *Johnson says that "government doesn't belong in the bedroom."*

-   *Johnson favored a federal law to legalize gay marriage across the
    United States, rather than leaving the issue up to the individual
    states.*

Johnson says that "government doesn't belong in the bedroom." He
believes that the government should not regulate marriage at all. He
believes the government "should not impose its values upon marriage" but
instead "should protect the rights of couples to engage in civil unions
if they wish, as well as the rights of religious organizations to follow
their beliefs."

He applauded the repeal of Don't ask, don't tell, and opined that the
repeal was "long overdue."

Formerly a supporter of civil unions for same-sex couples, on December
1, 2011, Johnson voiced his support for same-sex marriage. He believes
that "denying those rights and benefits to gay couples is
discrimination, plain and simple." He has also stated that marriage laws
should treat every individual equally.

In 2013, Johnson was a signatory to an amicus curiae brief submitted to
the Supreme Court in support of same-sex marriage during the
Hollingsworth v. Perry case.

Johnson favored a federal law to legalize gay marriage across the United
States, rather than leaving the issue up to the individual states.

Private prisons
===============

-   *I figured that if we went to a privatized system, we wouldn't have
    to come up with the funds and it would cost only 2/3 of what it was
    costing the state.*

-   *As Governor of New Mexico Johnson dealt with overcrowded prisons
    (and approximately seven hundred prisoners held out-of-state due to
    a lack of available space) by opening two private prisons, later
    arguing that "building two private prisons in New Mexico solved some
    very serious problems - and saved the taxpayers a lot of money."*

-   *A consent decree forced the federal government to oversee the state
    facilities.*

As Governor of New Mexico Johnson dealt with overcrowded prisons (and
approximately seven hundred prisoners held out-of-state due to a lack of
available space) by opening two private prisons, later arguing that
"building two private prisons in New Mexico solved some very serious
problems - and saved the taxpayers a lot of money."

"The single biggest issue in NM was the prison system. The courts had
ruled that NM prisons were woefully incompetent to carry out their
functions. A consent decree forced the federal government to oversee the
state facilities.\
Approximately 700 prisoners from NM were being housed out of state due
to prison wing closures resulting from federal oversight. This put
prisons at the forefront of my agenda. The NM legislature did not want
to address the prison issue. It had become an enormously expensive and
embarrassing situation.\
I figured that if we went to a privatized system, we wouldn't have to
come up with the funds and it would cost only 2/3 of what it was costing
the state.\
Public control of the prisons cost about \$76/prisoner/day, and private
control cost about \$56/prisoner/day. We were able to provide the same
services and still run the prisons with those significant savings. The
system is still running that way today."

Stem cell research
==================

-   *Johnson opposes public funding of stem cell research, and instead
    "should only be completed by private laboratories that operate
    without federal funding."*

Johnson opposes public funding of stem cell research, and instead
"should only be completed by private laboratories that operate without
federal funding."

Tobacco control
===============

-   *Johnson does not oppose special sin taxes on cigarettes.*

Johnson does not oppose special sin taxes on cigarettes.

See also
========

-   *Gary Johnson presidential campaign, 2016*

-   *Gary Johnson presidential campaign, 2012*

Gary Johnson presidential campaign, 2016

Gary Johnson presidential campaign, 2012

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Issues at Gary Johnson's Our America Initiative*

-   *OnTheIssues Gary Johnson on the issues*

Issues at garyjohnson2016.com (official campaign site)

Issues at Gary Johnson's Our America Initiative

OnTheIssues Gary Johnson on the issues
