**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Premier%20of%20the%20Soviet%20Union\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Premier of the Soviet Union
===========================

-   *The government of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
    began seizing Soviet ministries in the aftermath of the coup, and by
    December 1991 the Soviet government had lost control.*

-   *The Premier of the Soviet Union (Russian: Глава Правительства СССР)
    was the head of government of the Union of Soviet Socialist
    Republics (USSR).*

The Premier of the Soviet Union (Russian: Глава Правительства СССР) was
the head of government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
(USSR). The office had three different names throughout its existence:
Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars (1923–1946), Chairman of
the Council of Ministers (1946–1991) and Prime Minister of the Soviet
Union (1991). The term premier was used by outside commentators to
describe the office of head of government.

The first Soviet government was established on 6 July 1923. The
government was empowered to initiate decrees and legislation that were
binding throughout the USSR. After the ousting of Khrushchev in 1964,
Kosygin was appointed head of government. However, Kosygin's prestige
was weakened when he proposed the economic reform of 1965. Upon Valentin
Pavlov's ascension to the premiership, the Council of Ministers was
abolished and replaced with the Cabinet of Ministers. After the failed
August coup of 1991 and the revelation that the majority of the cabinet
members endorsed the coup, the Cabinet of Ministers was dissolved and
replaced by the Committee on the Operational Management of the Soviet
economy in 1991. The government of the Russian Soviet Federative
Socialist Republic began seizing Soviet ministries in the aftermath of
the coup, and by December 1991 the Soviet government had lost control.

Under the 1977 Soviet Constitution, the head of government was the
leader of the highest executive and administrative organ of state. It
functioned as the most influential office of government until the
establishment of the Office of the President of the Soviet Union in
1990. The head of government was responsible and accountable to the
Supreme Soviet (and it's Presidium). The head of government was tasked
with resolving all state administrative duties within the jurisdiction
of the USSR to the degree which were not the responsibility of the
Supreme Soviet or it's Presidium. The head of government managed the
national economy, formulated the five-year plans and ensured
socio-cultural development.

Twelve individuals became head of government. Of these, two died in
office of natural causes (Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin), three
resigned (Alexei Kosygin, Nikolai Tikhonov and Ivan Silayev) and three
held the offices of party secretary and head of government concurrently
(Stalin and Nikita Khrushchev). Lenin was elected the first head of
government on 6 July 1923 by a decision of the Central Executive
Committee. Ivan Silayev spent the briefest time in office at 126 days.
At more than 16 years, Kosygin spent the longest time in office.

Officeholders
=============

See also
========

-   *First Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union*

-   *List of leaders of the Soviet Union*

-   *List of heads of state of the Soviet Union*

-   *Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union*

Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union

First Deputy Premier of the Soviet Union

List of heads of state of the Soviet Union

List of leaders of the Soviet Union

Notes
=====

References
==========

Citations
=========

Sources
=======
