**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Promise\_of\_Blood\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Promise of Blood
================

-   *A sequel titled The Crimson Campaign was released on May 6, 2014.*

-   *Promise of Blood is the first book in The Powder Mage trilogy
    written by American author Brian McClellan.*

-   *It won the 2014 Morningstar Award for Best Fantasy Newcomer.*

Promise of Blood is the first book in The Powder Mage trilogy written by
American author Brian McClellan. It was first published by Orbit Books
in 2013. A sequel titled The Crimson Campaign was released on May 6,
2014. It won the 2014 Morningstar Award for Best Fantasy Newcomer.

Plot
====

-   *At the beginning of Promise of Blood, Field Marshal Tamas has just
    committed a brutal coup against Adro's monarchy.*

-   *Taniel, Tamas's son and a talented powder mage who is able to
    consume gunpowder to give himself supernatural powers, is given the
    task to hunt down an uncommonly powerful member of the Royal Cabal
    who managed to escape during the coup.*

At the beginning of Promise of Blood, Field Marshal Tamas has just
committed a brutal coup against Adro's monarchy. When he kills every
single member of the Royal Cabal, they all utter the same mysterious
phrase: "You can't break Kresimir's Promise".

Adamat, a former police inspector who is now a private investigator, is
asked by Tamas to help solve the mystery. Meanwhile, Tamas is busy with
purging the country's nobility and struggling to maintain peace during
the inevitable civil war.

Taniel, Tamas's son and a talented powder mage who is able to consume
gunpowder to give himself supernatural powers, is given the task to hunt
down an uncommonly powerful member of the Royal Cabal who managed to
escape during the coup. Soon it becomes clear that overthrowing the
monarchy was just the beginning.

Reception
=========

-   *In 2014, Promise of Blood won the Morningstar Award for Best
    Fantasy Newcomer.*

Kirkus Reviews gave the book a starred review stating: "A thoroughly
satisfying yarn that should keep readers waiting impatiently for further
installments." Publishers Weekly, in reviewing the book, stated
"McClellan neatly mixes intrigue and action..." and gave the book a
generally positive review.

In 2014, Promise of Blood won the Morningstar Award for Best Fantasy
Newcomer. The book's cover, by Gene Mollica and Michael Frost, was also
nominated for the Ravenheart Award for Best Fantasy Book Jacket/Artist.

See also
========

-   *Brian McClellan, the author of The Powder Mage trilogy*

-   *The Crimson Campaign, the sequel to Promise of Blood*

-   *The Autumn Republic, the sequel to The Crimson Campaign*

The Crimson Campaign, the sequel to Promise of Blood

The Autumn Republic, the sequel to The Crimson Campaign

Brian McClellan, the author of The Powder Mage trilogy

External links
==============

-   *Official website of Brian McClellan*

Official website of Brian McClellan

References
==========
