**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rabbit%20Hash%2C%20Kentucky\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Rabbit Hash, Kentucky
=====================

-   *The town is notable for its name, its string of canine mayors, and
    its historic general store (c. 1831) which was destroyed by fire
    in 2015.*

-   *Rabbit Hash is an unincorporated community and census-designated
    place (CDP) in Boone County, Kentucky, United States, with a
    population of 315 (2010 census).*

-   *It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.*

Rabbit Hash is an unincorporated community and census-designated place
(CDP) in Boone County, Kentucky, United States, with a population of 315
(2010 census). It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The town is notable for its name, its string of canine mayors, and its
historic general store (c. 1831) which was destroyed by fire in 2015. A
new structure was later built in its place.

Origin of name
==============

-   *His response led to the other villagers nicknaming him Rabbit Hash
    as a joke.*

-   *During the early 19th century the town was well known for a rabbit
    hash meal.*

-   *According to folklore, a man responded that he would be serving
    rabbit hash dinner.*

-   *The name Rabbit Hash may derive from the historic use of the local
    rabbit population as food.*

The hamlet was originally known as Carlton, but was required to change
its name because mail was being mixed up with the larger community of
Carrollton several miles down the Ohio River.\[citation needed\] The
community is still referred to as the Carlton Voter Precinct.

The name Rabbit Hash may derive from the historic use of the local
rabbit population as food. During the early 19th century the town was
well known for a rabbit hash meal.

It is said that, in December 1847, the townsfolk were said to be
discussing what each family would be serving for their Christmas dinner.
According to folklore, a man responded that he would be serving rabbit
hash dinner. His response led to the other villagers nicknaming him
Rabbit Hash as a joke. Eventually, the nickname became the known name of
the village itself, and the steamboats on the nearby Ohio River stopping
to order the famous hash referred to the town by it.

National Register of Historic Places
====================================

-   *The store was added to the National Register of Historic Places on
    February 2, 1989.*

-   *The Rabbit Hash Historic District was added to the National
    Register of Historic Places on December 4, 2003.*

-   *The hamlet's most notable building, the Rabbit Hash General Store
    (c. 1831), was regarded as "the best known and best preserved
    country store in Kentucky".*

The hamlet's most notable building, the Rabbit Hash General Store (c.
1831), was regarded as "the best known and best preserved country store
in Kentucky". The store was added to the National Register of Historic
Places on February 2, 1989. On February 13, 2016, the famous General
Store was destroyed by a fire, and the latest mayoral election also
acted as a fundraiser to restore it. It was restored and reopened on
April 1, 2017.

The Rabbit Hash Historic District was added to the National Register of
Historic Places on December 4, 2003. It includes 330 acres (1.3 km2), 12
buildings, 6 structures, and 3 objects around 10021-10410 Lower River
Road.

Canine mayors
=============

-   *On November 8, 2016 a mayoral election took place in Rabbit Hash.*

-   *In an unprecedented move, the Rabbit Hash Historical Society has
    given official positions to the 1st and 2nd runners-up, Bourbon and
    Lady, as Ambassadors to Rabbit Hash.*

-   *Proceeds from the election go to the Rabbit Hash historical society
    and will help restore the Rabbit Hash General store.*

The first elected mayor in Rabbit Hash history was an adopted dog "of
unknown parentage" named Goofy Borneman-Calhoun, who was inaugurated in
1998 for a four-year term, after an election covered in the documentary
Rabbit Hash (The Center of the Universe). He died in office in July
2001, aged 16.

The mayoralty remained unfilled until the next election, held in 2004,
at which time Junior Cochran, a black Labrador, assumed office. Junior
came under the scrutiny of the Northern Kentucky Health Department and
was banned from entering the town's General Store due to complaints.
According to a WXIX-TV report, on March 13, 2008, the dog's owner
petitioned for an exemption for the "mayor.” On May 30, 2008, WXIX-TV
reported that Junior had died in office at the age of 15.

On August 31, 2008 a special election was held to fill the vacancy left
by the death of mayor Junior, and was won by Lucy Lou, a border collie,
becoming the town's first female mayor. Mayor Lucy Lou shared a "Talking
Points" walk with Bill Geist (CBS Sunday Morning), accepted a \$1,000
stimulus check from Reader's Digest "We Hear You America Tour", served
as grand marshall of the Covington Paw-Rade, appeared in a segment of
"The List", and has placed 3 years in a row in the Best Elected Official
category in Cincinnati CityBeat magazine's Best Of Cincinnati issue
(winning 1st place in 2013). On September 7, 2015, Mayor Lucy's office
announced that she was considering running for U.S. President, and is
the only mayor not to die in office. Lucy Lou died on September 10th
2018 aged 12.

On November 8, 2016 a mayoral election took place in Rabbit Hash.
Brynneth Pawltro "Brynn", a pit bull took first place having raised
\$3,367 and is now the current mayor of Rabbit Hash.

Bourbon, an Australian shepherd, came in second place raising \$2,336.

Lady Stone, a border collie, came in third place raising \$1,621.
Proceeds from the election go to the Rabbit Hash historical society and
will help restore the Rabbit Hash General store.

In an unprecedented move, the Rabbit Hash Historical Society has given
official positions to the 1st and 2nd runners-up, Bourbon and Lady, as
Ambassadors to Rabbit Hash. In the case that the official mayor is
unavailable for an event or obligation, the Ambassadors will fill in.

List of Mayors, as of 8 November 2016:

Goofy Borneman:\
1998–2001\*\
\[In 2001, after the death of Mayor Borneman, the post of mayor was left
empty until the next election in 2004.\]

Junior Cochran:\
2004–2008

Lucy Lou:\
2008–2016

Brynneth Pawltro:\
2016–

Industry
========

-   *The Duke Energy East Bend Generating Station coal-fired power plant
    is located in the southeastern part of the CDP.*

The Duke Energy East Bend Generating Station coal-fired power plant is
located in the southeastern part of the CDP.

Notable people
==============

-   *Emma Bell Miles, a writer, poet, and artist, lived in Rabbit Hash
    in her early childhood.*

Emma Bell Miles, a writer, poet, and artist, lived in Rabbit Hash in her
early childhood.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Rabbit Hash Historical Society*

-   *"Rabbit Hash", Chronicles of Boone County, Boone County Public
    Library (KY)*

-   *Preserve America Community: Rabbit Hash, Kentucky*

-   *Boone County Planning Commission map (has map of Rabbit Hash and
    significant historic structures)*

Preserve America Community: Rabbit Hash, Kentucky

Rabbit Hash Historical Society

Fox19.com."Small town remembers fallen canine mayor", WXIX-TV, May 30,
2008. Accessed May 31, 2008

"Rabbit Hash", Chronicles of Boone County, Boone County Public Library
(KY)

Boone County Planning Commission map (has map of Rabbit Hash and
significant historic structures)
