**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ram\_Bahadur\_Singh\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Ram Bahadur Singh
=================

-   *Singh died in hospital on 23 February 2006, soon after
    angioplasty.*

-   *Ram Bahadur Singh (10 March 1934 – 22 February 2006) was a leader
    of Samajwadi Janata Party (Rashtriya) (SJP).*

-   *In 1949, Singh joined the Socialist Party and between 1967–1972 he
    was secretary of the Samyukta Socialist Party in his home district.*

Ram Bahadur Singh (10 March 1934 – 22 February 2006) was a leader of
Samajwadi Janata Party (Rashtriya) (SJP). He came from the state of
Bihar in India and served as member of the Lok Sabha, the lower house of
the Parliament of India.

Singh was born on 10 March 1934 in Harpur, Saran district, Bihar. He was
married to Rajkumari Devi and had both a son and a daughter. He attended
Rajendra College in Chhapra and had a BA degree.

In 1949, Singh joined the Socialist Party and between 1967–1972 he was
secretary of the Samyukta Socialist Party in his home district. He was
elected to the Legislative Assembly of Bihar for the periods 1967–1968
and 1972–1974.

Singh was elected to the 8th Lok Sabha from the Chapra constituency and
to the 9th and 11th Lok Sabhas from the Maharajganj constituency. He
served briefly as a minister of state in the Department of Rural
Development during the government led by Chandra Shekhar. He was a
member of the Janata Dal party around this time.

Singh was general secretary of the SJP in 1983–1984 and principal
general secretary from 1996. He spent three months in prison in 1964 for
his participation in the Bhoomi Andolan and was detained under the
provisions of the Maintenance of Internal Security Act (MISA) for a
further three months in 1974 after he had been involved with an andolan
led by Jai Prakash Narayan. He was also detained for around 15 months
during the Emergency of 1975–76, again under the provisions of the MISA.

Singh died in hospital on 23 February 2006, soon after angioplasty. His
wife had predeceased him.

References
==========
