**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Residences%20of%20Donald%20Trump\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Residences of Donald Trump
==========================

-   *Since the completion of Trump Tower in 1983, Trump has lived in a
    three-level penthouse on the top floors.*

-   *Upon Trump's election to the US presidency, he moved into the White
    House in Washington, D.C., while First Lady Melania and their son
    initially stayed at Trump Tower in Manhattan until the end of the
    school year before moving to the White House as well.*

-   *U.S. President Donald Trump currently has seven residences.*

-   *In 1971, Trump moved to a studio on 75th Street in Manhattan.*

U.S. President Donald Trump currently has seven residences.

During his time at the New York Military Academy, he lived on campus; he
later rented row houses in college. In 1971, Trump moved to a studio on
75th Street in Manhattan. Since the completion of Trump Tower in 1983,
Trump has lived in a three-level penthouse on the top floors. He
purchased the Seven Springs mansion in Bedford, New York, in 1995. Upon
Trump's election to the US presidency, he moved into the White House in
Washington, D.C., while First Lady Melania and their son initially
stayed at Trump Tower in Manhattan until the end of the school year
before moving to the White House as well.

Current residences
==================

Beverly Hills
=============

-   *Trump owns a six-bedroom mansion in Beverly Hills, California,
    which Trump had rarely used and had put on the market and rented out
    at different times.*

Trump owns a six-bedroom mansion in Beverly Hills, California, which
Trump had rarely used and had put on the market and rented out at
different times.

Mar-a-Lago
==========

Seven Springs
=============

-   *In 2015, Trump placed most of the property under a conservation
    easement, apparently signaling the abandonment of any major
    development plans.*

-   *Trump purchased the property in 1995 for \$7.5 million.*

-   *Trump owns a 39,000 square feet (3,600 m2) mansion on 213 acres
    (86 ha) in Bedford and New Castle, New York.*

Trump owns a 39,000 square feet (3,600 m2) mansion on 213 acres (86 ha)
in Bedford and New Castle, New York. The mansion has an indoor pool of
white marble on its first floor and sixty rooms, including thirteen
bedrooms and twelve baths. The property has a glass and stone orangery
for growing citrus, with a bowling alley in its basement. Also on the
property is a formal garden pavilion, a fountain in the front lawn, a
greenhouse and root cellar, stone water tower, and a Tudor Revival house
and courtyard known by the name of "Nonesuch".

It was formerly the home of Eugene Meyer and his family, including
Katharine Graham. In 1919, Meyer had artist and architect Charles A.
Platt design the mansion of sandstone from the property. He spent \$2
million constructing it. Trump purchased the property in 1995 for \$7.5
million. Trump originally planned to build a golf course there, however
he was opposed by the governments of the three municipalities the
property lies within, and he wanted to prevent a new course competing
with his existing course nearby in Briarcliff Manor. Trump's plans
changed for Seven Springs to include building fifteen mansions, each to
sell for about \$25 million, and renovating the two existing houses. In
2015, Trump placed most of the property under a conservation easement,
apparently signaling the abandonment of any major development plans.

Trump Parc
==========

-   *Donald Trump owns the 38-story Trump Parc condominium skyscraper at
    106 Central Park South, and often privately owns multiple units
    within it, which he rents for up to \$100,000 a month.*

Donald Trump owns the 38-story Trump Parc condominium skyscraper at 106
Central Park South, and often privately owns multiple units within it,
which he rents for up to \$100,000 a month.

Trump Park Avenue
=================

-   *Trump has several apartments at Trump Park Avenue, where his
    daughter Ivanka lives.*

Trump has several apartments at Trump Park Avenue, where his daughter
Ivanka lives.

Trump Tower penthouse
=====================

-   *Described as Louis XIV-style, Trump's penthouse at Trump Tower has
    three stories and is reportedly worth \$100 million.*

Described as Louis XIV-style, Trump's penthouse at Trump Tower has three
stories and is reportedly worth \$100 million. The interior, designed by
Angelo Donghia, has gold-trimmed furniture, marble floors, columns,
tables, and walls, frescoed ceilings, bronze statues, and crystal
chandeliers.

White House
===========

Former residences
=================

Queens, New York City
=====================

-   *His childhood was spent at a 24-room red brick Tudor Revival house
    in Jamaica Estates, Queens, the home of his parents Frederick and
    Mary Anne MacLeod Trump.*

His childhood was spent at a 24-room red brick Tudor Revival house in
Jamaica Estates, Queens, the home of his parents Frederick and Mary Anne
MacLeod Trump.

School living
=============

-   *During his early life, he lived at the New York Military Academy, a
    private boarding school.*

During his early life, he lived at the New York Military Academy, a
private boarding school. He subsequently attended Fordham University for
two years and transferred to the Wharton School at the University of
Pennsylvania, where he lived in rented off-campus row houses.

Manhattan penthouse
===================

-   *Around the 1970s Trump lived in a penthouse apartment at the
    Phoenix, a luxury apartment building on 65th Street in the Upper
    East Side in Manhattan.*

Around the 1970s Trump lived in a penthouse apartment at the Phoenix, a
luxury apartment building on 65th Street in the Upper East Side in
Manhattan. The apartment had large panoramic windows; he decorated the
interior in beige, brown, and chrome.

Greenwich mansion
=================

-   *Trump purchased a 20,000 square feet (1,900 m2) mansion in
    Greenwich, Connecticut in 1982 for \$4 million.*

Trump purchased a 20,000 square feet (1,900 m2) mansion in Greenwich,
Connecticut in 1982 for \$4 million. The house has eight bedrooms,
eleven baths, a 4,000 square feet (370 m2) guest house, a putting green
and tennis court, indoor and outdoor pools, and a sauna.

Fifth Avenue apartment
======================

-   *According to family friend Nikki Haskell, Donald and Ivana lived in
    Olympic Tower prior to moving to 800 Fifth Avenue*

-   *Trump and his wife Ivana lived in an apartment on Manhattan's Fifth
    Avenue, which was decorated with beige velvet sofas and goatskin
    tables.*

Trump and his wife Ivana lived in an apartment on Manhattan's Fifth
Avenue, which was decorated with beige velvet sofas and goatskin tables.
According to family friend Nikki Haskell, Donald and Ivana lived in
Olympic Tower prior to moving to 800 Fifth Avenue

Virginia residence
==================

-   *Trump had a residence at Trump Vineyard Estates, a 45-room 230,000
    square feet (21,000 m2) mansion.*

Trump had a residence at Trump Vineyard Estates, a 45-room 230,000
square feet (21,000 m2) mansion.

See also
========

-   *List of residences of Presidents of the United States*

List of residences of Presidents of the United States

References
==========
