**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rob\_Thomson\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Rob Thomson
===========

-   *He then served as the Yankees’ bench coach (2008), third base coach
    (2009-2014), and bench coach, again (2015-2017).*

-   *Robert Lewis Thomson (born August 16, 1963) is a Canadian former
    minor league baseball player, who is currently the bench coach for
    the Philadelphia Phillies.*

Robert Lewis Thomson (born August 16, 1963) is a Canadian former minor
league baseball player, who is currently the bench coach for the
Philadelphia Phillies.

During Thomson’s playing career, he was a catcher and third baseman in
the Detroit Tigers organization, from 1985 to 1988.

Following his years as a player, Thomson wore many minor league hats,
including coaching, spending one season as manager of the (Class A)
Oneonta Yankees, and several more years in various front office
(executive) capacities (including his term as Major League Field
Coordinator for the New York Yankees). He then served as the Yankees’
bench coach (2008), third base coach (2009-2014), and bench coach, again
(2015-2017).

Career
======

Olympics and minor leagues
==========================

-   *He played 136 games at catcher, 55 games at third base, and pitched
    in one game.*

-   *Thomson was selected by the Detroit Tigers in the 32nd round of the
    1985 Major League Baseball draft from the University of Kansas.*

-   *He played catcher and third base in the Tigers' minor league system
    until 1988, reaching as high as Class A.*

Thompson represented Canada in baseball, which was a demonstration
sport, in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. For one year, he
played baseball for St. Clair County Community College.

Thomson was selected by the Detroit Tigers in the 32nd round of the 1985
Major League Baseball draft from the University of Kansas. He played
catcher and third base in the Tigers' minor league system until 1988,
reaching as high as Class A. In 661 at bats he hit .225/.312/.304 with
seven home runs and three steals. He played 136 games at catcher, 55
games at third base, and pitched in one game.

Coaching and front office career
================================

-   *Thomson then became a minor league coach for the team.*

-   *In 1990, Thomson joined the New York Yankees organization as a
    third base coach for the team's Class-A affiliate in Fort
    Lauderdale.*

Thomson then became a minor league coach for the team. In 1990, Thomson
joined the New York Yankees organization as a third base coach for the
team's Class-A affiliate in Fort Lauderdale. He moved into the front
office in 1998 as a Field Coordinator, and became Director of Player
Development in 2000. Prior to the 2003 season, he was named Vice
President of Minor League Development, and he was named to the Major
League coaching staff in November of the same year.

Major league coach
==================

New York Yankees
================

-   *On September 27, 2006, Thomson took over as first base coach of the
    Yankees in place of Tony Peña, who had learned before the game that
    his father had died.*

-   *It was Thomson's first major league game as a manager, and he
    became the first Canadian to manage a Major League game since George
    Gibson for the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1934; the Yankees lost 13–4.*

-   *Prior to the 2008 season, incoming manager Joe Girardi named
    Thomson his bench coach.*

-   *Prior to the 2015 season, he was named bench coach.*

On September 27, 2006, Thomson took over as first base coach of the
Yankees in place of Tony Peña, who had learned before the game that his
father had died. He filled in at the position for four games, and Peña
returned in time for the season finale on October 1.

Prior to the 2008 season, incoming manager Joe Girardi named Thomson his
bench coach.

On April 4, 2008, Girardi fell ill with a respiratory infection and
designated Thomson to manage that night's game against the Tampa Bay
Rays. It was Thomson's first major league game as a manager, and he
became the first Canadian to manage a Major League game since George
Gibson for the Pittsburgh Pirates in 1934; the Yankees lost 13–4.
Thomson also managed the April 5 game due to Girardi's illness. He
served as the team's third base coach for six seasons, and was a member
of the coaching staff for the Yankees' 2009 World Series championship.
Prior to the 2015 season, he was named bench coach.

Philadelphia Phillies (2018-present)
====================================

-   *Thomson was hired as the 2018 bench coach for the Philadelphia
    Phillies.*

-   *He was announced as being the team's bench coach for 2019 as well.*

Thomson was hired as the 2018 bench coach for the Philadelphia Phillies.
He was announced as being the team's bench coach for 2019 as well.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Rob Thomson Philadelphia Phillies bio*

-   *Rob Thomson at SABR (Baseball BioProject)*

Career statistics and player information from The Baseball Cube,
or Baseball-Reference (Minors), or Retrosheet

Rob Thomson at SABR (Baseball BioProject)

Rob Thomson Philadelphia Phillies bio
