**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert\_Easton\_%28bass%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Robert Easton (bass)
====================

-   *Robert Easton (8 June 1898 in Sunderland, England – 1987) was a
    British bass of the mid-twentieth century.*

-   *Robert Easton was severely wounded in the trenches in the First
    World War, having a leg amputated, and when he was invalided out of
    the army he was offered training, first as an accountant, which he
    realised quickly he was not suited for, and then as a singer.*

Robert Easton (8 June 1898 in Sunderland, England – 1987) was a British
bass of the mid-twentieth century.

His teachers were Bozelli, Dinh Gilly, Norman Notly and Harry Plunket
Greene. He was successful in both concert hall and opera house, being
noted, inter alia, for the heavy Wagnerian bass roles.

On 5 October 1938 he was one of the original 16 singers in Ralph Vaughan
Williams's Serenade to Music. The solo lines composed for him set the
words, 'The reason is, your spirits are attentive' and 'Is fit for
treasons, stratagems and spoils.'

Robert Easton was severely wounded in the trenches in the First World
War, having a leg amputated, and when he was invalided out of the army
he was offered training, first as an accountant, which he realised
quickly he was not suited for, and then as a singer.

His 'debut' (so he always said) was deputising for an indisposed Harold
Williams at the Royal Albert Hall in the early 1920s, singing Stanford's
Songs of the Sea under Thomas Beecham, who then offered him many
opportunities to forward his career.

He recorded principally for the Columbia label, but, unfortunately, most
of these do not do his voice justice. Private recordings made in the
1950s are a much better indication of what he really sounded like, the
voice being warm and round. He was a true bass, being able to sing
bottom B♭ with ease.

In 1930s he sang at Covent Garden and in the early 1950s took part in
the first BBC television broadcast, thereafter appearing frequently,
including having his own series.

He continued singing as well as being an inspirational teacher
throughout the 1970s until he died in 1987. He freely gave of his time
for all kinds of charity recitals and when Owen Brannigan was severely
injured in a car crash took over many of his engagements, in spite of
being in his seventies.

He had a large build with a sense of humour to match and even in later
life used to flirt with every attractive young lady he would encounter
on the London Underground. Having said this, he was very happily
married, with one daughter, and lived in Haslemere for at least the last
twenty years of his life.

Literature
==========

-   *D. Brook, Singers of Today (Revised Edition - Rockliff, London
    1958), 70-74.*

D. Brook, Singers of Today (Revised Edition - Rockliff, London 1958),
70-74.
