**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rohit\_Shetty\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Rohit Shetty
============

-   *His work as a filmmaker includes the Golmaal film series, the
    Singham film series, Bol Bachchan, Chennai Express (for which he was
    nominated for Filmfare Award for Best Director), and Dilwale.*

-   *Rohit Shetty (born 14 March 1973) is an Indian film director and
    producer.*

Rohit Shetty (born 14 March 1973) is an Indian film director and
producer. His work as a filmmaker includes the Golmaal film series, the
Singham film series, Bol Bachchan, Chennai Express (for which he was
nominated for Filmfare Award for Best Director), and Dilwale.

Personal life
=============

-   *He was born to Ratna, a Bollywood junior artist, and
    actor/stuntman M. B. Shetty who had acted in Hindi and Kannada
    films.*

He was born to Ratna, a Bollywood junior artist, and actor/stuntman M.
B. Shetty who had acted in Hindi and Kannada films. He has four
siblings.

Career
======

-   *In 2014, he turned into a producer with Singham Returns,
    co-producing the film under his banner Rohit Shetty Productions.*

-   *In 2014, Shetty directed Singham Returns with Ajay Devgn, a sequel
    to his 2011 film Singham.*

-   *Shetty directed Golmaal Again, the fourth film of the Golmaal
    series.*

-   *Chennai Express became the highest-grossing Bollywood film in the
    domestic market.*

He started his career at the age of 17 as an assistant director with
Kuku Kohli during Phool Aur Kaante (Ajay Devgn's debut film that
costarred Madhoo). Then he assisted him in Ek Aur Kohinoor, which was
never released. He also worked with him on Suhaag (starring Ajay Devgn,
Akshay Kumar, Karisma Kapoor), Haqeeqat (starring Ajay Devgn, Tabu) and
Zulmi (starring Akshay Kumar, Twinkle Khanna). In the movie, Suhaag,
Rohit also played a body double for Akshay Kumar.

After that, he started working with Anees Bazmee on Pyaar To Hona Hi
Tha, followed by Hindustan Ki Kasam and Raju Chacha.

Shetty directed his debut feature film, Zameen, as an independent
director with Devgn in 2003 at the age of 30. Zameen did average
business at the boxoffice. He rose to fame after he directed the 2006
comedy film, Golmaal: Fun Unlimited starring Ajay Devgan, Arshad Warsi,
Tusshar Kapoor and Sharman Joshi.

In 2008, he directed his third film, Sunday, starring Devgn, Warsi and
Ayesha Takia. Sunday was a comic-thriller.\[citation needed\] Shetty's
second 2008 project, was the sequel to Golmaal, titled Golmaal Returns.
The sequel featured most of the original cast, except Sharman Joshi, who
was replaced by Shreyas Talpade, and starred Kareena Kapoor. Golmaal
Returns. In 2009, he released All the Best: Fun Begins. In 2010, Shetty
directed Golmaal 3. Shetty's 2011 Singham also featured Devgn in the
title role, as a Police Inspector fighting against corruption. Singham
was praised for the action sequences and direction, and Devgn's
performance. His next release, Bol Bachchan, is a comedy-drama starring
Devgn and Abhishek Bachchan. Bol Bachchan was a commercial success in
India.

Shetty's Chennai Express, starring Shah Rukh Khan and Deepika Padukone,
was released on 9 August 2013. Chennai Express became the
highest-grossing Bollywood film in the domestic market. The film earned
over US\$17.4 million to become the third-highest-grossing Bollywood
film overseas. The film also set a number of box office records, for the
highest opening-day gross, highest paid preview, highest single-day
gross, biggest opening weekend, highest opening week and the fastest
film to reach ₹100 crore and ₹2 billion in the domestic market.

Shetty has played the judge of the television show Comedy Circus.

In 2014, Shetty directed Singham Returns with Ajay Devgn, a sequel to
his 2011 film Singham. He was also a part of the 5th season of
television stunt game show Fear Factor: Khatron Ke Khiladi in 2014 as
the host taking over from the previous host Akshay Kumar. In 2014, he
turned into a producer with Singham Returns, co-producing the film under
his banner Rohit Shetty Productions. He directed Dilwale (2015 film)
with Sharukh Khan and Kajol which is a box office success. He reprised
his part as host of the 6th season of Fear Factor: Khatron Ke Khiladi.

Shetty directed Golmaal Again, the fourth film of the Golmaal series.
The film, starring Ajay Devgn and Parineeti Chopra in lead, released in
October 2017 to mixed reviews but became the highest grossing Hindi film
of 2017, becoming the first Hindi blockbuster of the year. also becoming
the highest grossing diwali release of all time.

Filmography
===========

Films
=====

Television
==========

Awards and nominations
======================

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Rohit Shetty on IMDb*

Rohit Shetty on IMDb
