**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruby%20Hurley\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Ruby Hurley
===========

-   *Ruby Hurley (November 7, 1909 – August 9, 1980) was a leader in the
    Civil Rights Movement and administrator for the NAACP.*

-   *She was known as the "queen of civil rights".*

Ruby Hurley (November 7, 1909 – August 9, 1980) was a leader in the
Civil Rights Movement and administrator for the NAACP. She was known as
the "queen of civil rights".

Early life and education
========================

-   *She married William L. Hurley, a lieutenant in the US Army Corps of
    Engineers.*

-   *In 1939, Hurley was on a committee that was tasked with arranging
    for a performance from Marian Anderson, an African-American opera
    singer who had been barred from singing at Constitution Hall by the
    Daughters of the American Revolution.*

Ruby Ruffin was born on November 7, 1909, in Washington, D.C., to Alice
and Edward R. Ruffin. After she graduated from Dunbar High School in
1926, she attended Miner Teachers College (now known as University of
the District of Columbia) and Robert H. Terrell Law School. She worked
briefly for the federal government and at the Industrial Bank of
Washington. She married William L. Hurley, a lieutenant in the US Army
Corps of Engineers.

In 1939, Hurley was on a committee that was tasked with arranging for a
performance from Marian Anderson, an African-American opera singer who
had been barred from singing at Constitution Hall by the Daughters of
the American Revolution. The committee was able to secure a venue change
and Anderson performed at an open-air concert on the steps of the
Lincoln Memorial before a crowd of 75,000.

Career with the NAACP
=====================

-   *Walter Francis White, who headed the NAACP, appointed Hurley to the
    position of national Youth Secretary in 1943.*

-   *The headquarters became a focal point for civil rights organizers
    and Hurley worked alongside Vernon Jordan.*

-   *Hurley was forced to flee Alabama in the night on June 1, 1956,
    after the state barred the NAACP from operating there.*

For the next four years, Hurley worked reorganizing the D.C. branch of
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP),
bolstering their youth council. Walter Francis White, who headed the
NAACP, appointed Hurley to the position of national Youth Secretary in
1943. She moved to New York City and stayed in that role until 1950.
Hurley traveled across the country organizing youth councils and college
chapters, increasing their number from 86 to over 280 during her tenure.

In 1951, she moved from New York to Birmingham, Alabama, to set up an
NAACP office and oversee membership drives in Tennessee, Mississippi,
Alabama, Georgia, and Florida. It was the first permanent NAACP office
located in the Deep South. She became Regional Secretary of the NAACP's
newly formed Southeast Regional Office the following year. In 1955,
Hurley joined with civil rights activists Amzie Moore and Medgar Evers,
who was Field Secretary at the NAACP's Mississippi office, in
investigating the murders of minister George W. Lee and 14-year-old
Emmett Till. In order to interview witnesses for Till's case, Hurley
wore cotton picker's clothes. Following the Brown v. Board of Education
ruling in 1954, Hurley worked to implement racial integration in the
South. While she practiced Christian nonviolence, she appeared on the
cover of Jet magazine's October 6, 1955, issue with a caption reading
"Most Militant Negro Woman In The South". In 1956, Hurley helped to
prepare the case of Autherine Lucy to be allowed to attend the
University of Alabama. Hurley's efforts were met with open hostility and
she suffered from fatigue and weight loss. Her house was attacked and
she received obscene telephone calls. Following a riot at the University
of Alabama campus, black taxi drivers offered protection, circling her
home.

Hurley was forced to flee Alabama in the night on June 1, 1956, after
the state barred the NAACP from operating there. She moved to Atlanta
where she opened a regional office four months later. The headquarters
became a focal point for civil rights organizers and Hurley worked
alongside Vernon Jordan. Jordan and Fredericka Thompson Bradley assisted
Charlayne Hunter-Gault and Hamilton E. Holmes in gaining admission to
the University of Georgia in 1961. Following the assassination of Medgar
Evers in 1963, Hurley convinced his widow Myrlie to have him interred at
Arlington National Cemetery.

Death and legacy
================

-   *The Chattanooga–Hamilton County NAACP hosts an annual Ruby Hurley
    Image Awards.*

-   *Hurley retired on March 31, 1978, and served as president of United
    Methodist Women.*

-   *In 2009, Hurley was featured alongside Ella Baker on a 42-cent
    stamp.*

Hurley retired on March 31, 1978, and served as president of United
Methodist Women. She died on August 9, 1980, in Atlanta. The
Chattanooga–Hamilton County NAACP hosts an annual Ruby Hurley Image
Awards. In 2009, Hurley was featured alongside Ella Baker on a 42-cent
stamp.

References
==========

Further reading
===============

-   *"Ruby Hurley".*

Raines, Howell (1977). My Soul is Rested: Movement Days in the Deep
South Remembered. New York: Putnam. ISBN 978-0-399-11853-1.

Spring, Kelly. "Ruby Hurley". National Women's History Museum. 2017.
