**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rutgers%20University\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Rutgers University
==================

-   *Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey (/ˈrʌtɡərz/), commonly
    referred to as Rutgers University, Rutgers, or RU, is a public
    research university in New Jersey.*

-   *Rutgers has three campuses located throughout New Jersey: New
    Brunswick campus in New Brunswick and adjacent Piscataway, the
    Newark campus, and the Camden campus.*

-   *The college was renamed Rutgers College in 1825 in honor of Colonel
    Henry Rutgers.*

Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey (/ˈrʌtɡərz/), commonly
referred to as Rutgers University, Rutgers, or RU, is a public research
university in New Jersey. It is the largest institution of higher
education in New Jersey.

Rutgers was originally chartered as Queen's College on November 10,
1766. It is the eighth-oldest college in the United States and one of
the nine colonial colleges chartered before the American Revolution. The
college was renamed Rutgers College in 1825 in honor of Colonel Henry
Rutgers. For most of its existence, Rutgers was a private liberal arts
college but it evolved into a coeducational public research university
after being designated "The State University of New Jersey" by the New
Jersey Legislature in laws enacted in 1945 and 1956.

Rutgers has three campuses located throughout New Jersey: New Brunswick
campus in New Brunswick and adjacent Piscataway, the Newark campus, and
the Camden campus. The university has additional facilities elsewhere in
the state. Instruction is offered by 9,000 faculty members in 175
academic departments to over 45,000 undergraduate students and more than
20,000 graduate and professional students. The university is accredited
by the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools and is a member
of the Big Ten Academic Alliance, the Association of American
Universities and the Universities Research Association. The New
Brunswick campus was categorized by Howard and Matthew Green in their
book titled The Public Ivies: America's Flagship Public Universities
(2001) as a Public Ivy.

History
=======

Colonial period
===============

-   *Two decades after the College of New Jersey (now known as Princeton
    University) was established in 1746 by the New Light Presbyterians,
    ministers of the Dutch Reformed Church, seeking autonomy in
    ecclesiastical affairs in the American colonies, sought to establish
    a college to train those who wanted to become ministers within the
    church.*

-   *The Grammar School, today the private Rutgers Preparatory School,
    was a part of the college community until 1959.*

Two decades after the College of New Jersey (now known as Princeton
University) was established in 1746 by the New Light Presbyterians,
ministers of the Dutch Reformed Church, seeking autonomy in
ecclesiastical affairs in the American colonies, sought to establish a
college to train those who wanted to become ministers within the church.
Through several years of effort by the Rev. Theodorus Jacobus
Frelinghuysen (1691–1747) and Rev. Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh (1736–1790),
later the college's first president, Queen's College received its
charter on November 10, 1766 from New Jersey's last Royal Governor,
William Franklin (1730–1813), the illegitimate son of Founding Father
Benjamin Franklin. The original charter established the college under
the corporate name the trustees of Queen's College, in New-Jersey, named
in honor of King George III's Queen consort, Charlotte of
Mecklenburg-Strelitz (1744–1818), and created both the college and the
Queen's College Grammar School, intended to be a preparatory school
affiliated and governed by the college. The Grammar School, today the
private Rutgers Preparatory School, was a part of the college community
until 1959. New Brunswick was chosen as the location over Hackensack
because the New Brunswick Dutch had the support of the Anglican
population, making the royal charter easier to obtain.

The original purpose of Queen's College was to "educate the youth in
language, liberal, the divinity, and useful arts and sciences" and for
the training of future ministers for the Dutch Reformed Church The
college admitted its first students in 1771—a single sophomore and a
handful of first-year students taught by a lone instructor—and granted
its first degree in 1774, to Matthew Leydt. Despite the religious nature
of the early college, the first classes were held at a tavern called the
Sign of the Red Lion. When the Revolutionary War broke out and taverns
were suspected by the British as being hotbeds of rebel activity, the
college abandoned the tavern and held classes in private homes.

According to research from Scarlet and Black, "Rutgers depended on
slaves to build its campuses and serve its students and faculty; it
depended on the sale of black people to fund its very existence."

Financial troubles and a benefactor
===================================

-   *Shortly after, the New Brunswick Theological Seminary, founded in
    1784, relocated from Brooklyn, New York, to New Brunswick, and
    shared facilities with Queen's College (and the Queen's College
    Grammar School, as all three institutions were then overseen by the
    Reformed Church in America).*

-   *After several years of closure resulting from an economic
    depression after the War of 1812, Queen's College reopened in 1825
    and was renamed "Rutgers College" in honor of American Revolutionary
    War hero Colonel Henry Rutgers (1745–1830).*

In its early years, due to a lack of funds, Queen's College was closed
for two extended periods. Early trustees considered merging the college
with the College of New Jersey, in Princeton (the measure failed by one
vote) and later considered relocating to New York City. In 1808, after
raising \$12,000, the college was temporarily reopened and broke ground
on a building of its own, called "Old Queens", designed by architect
John McComb, Jr. The college's third president, the Rev. Ira Condict,
laid the cornerstone on April 27, 1809. Shortly after, the New Brunswick
Theological Seminary, founded in 1784, relocated from Brooklyn, New
York, to New Brunswick, and shared facilities with Queen's College (and
the Queen's College Grammar School, as all three institutions were then
overseen by the Reformed Church in America). During those formative
years, all three institutions fit into Old Queens. In 1830, the Queen's
College Grammar School moved across the street, and in 1856, the
Seminary relocated to a seven-acre (28,000 m2) tract less than one-half
mile (800 m) away.

After several years of closure resulting from an economic depression
after the War of 1812, Queen's College reopened in 1825 and was renamed
"Rutgers College" in honor of American Revolutionary War hero Colonel
Henry Rutgers (1745–1830). According to the Board of Trustees, Colonel
Rutgers was honored because he epitomized Christian values. A year after
the school was renamed, it received two donations from its namesake: a
\$200 bell still hanging from the cupola of Old Queen's and a \$5,000
bond (equivalent to \$111,000 in 2018) which placed the college on sound
financial footing.

Land-grant college
==================

-   *Rutgers created the New Jersey College for Women in 1918, and the
    School of Education in 1924.*

-   *Rutgers College continued as a liberal arts college within the
    university.*

-   *Rutgers College became the land-grant college of New Jersey in 1864
    under the Morrill Act of 1862, resulting in the establishment of the
    Rutgers Scientific School, featuring departments of agriculture,
    engineering, and chemistry.*

Rutgers College became the land-grant college of New Jersey in 1864
under the Morrill Act of 1862, resulting in the establishment of the
Rutgers Scientific School, featuring departments of agriculture,
engineering, and chemistry. The Rutgers Scientific School would expand
over the years to grow into the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment
Station (1880) and divide into the College of Engineering (1914) and the
College of Agriculture (1921). Rutgers created the New Jersey College
for Women in 1918, and the School of Education in 1924. With the
development of graduate education, and the continued expansion of the
institution, the collection of schools became Rutgers University in
1924. Rutgers College continued as a liberal arts college within the
university. Later, University College (1945) was founded to serve
part-time, commuting students and Livingston College (1969) was created
by the Rutgers Trustees, ensuring that the interests of ethnically
diverse New Jersey students were met.

State University
================

-   *Rutgers was designated the State University of New Jersey by acts
    of the New Jersey Legislature in 1945 and 1956.*

-   *These two institutions became Rutgers University–Newark and Rutgers
    University–Camden, respectively.*

-   *Shortly after, the University of Newark (1935) was merged with
    Rutgers in 1946, as were the College of South Jersey and South
    Jersey Law School, in 1950.*

Rutgers was designated the State University of New Jersey by acts of the
New Jersey Legislature in 1945 and 1956. Shortly after, the University
of Newark (1935) was merged with Rutgers in 1946, as were the College of
South Jersey and South Jersey Law School, in 1950. These two
institutions became Rutgers University–Newark and Rutgers
University–Camden, respectively. On September 10, 1970, after much
debate, the Board of Governors voted to admit women into Rutgers
College.

There were setbacks in the growth of the university. In 1967, the
Rutgers Physics Department had a Centers of Excellence Grant from the
NSF which allowed the Physics Department to hire several faculty each
year. These faculty were to be paid by the grant for three years, but
after that time any faculty hired with the Associate or Full Professor
designation would become tenured. The Governor and the Chancellor forced
Rutgers to lose this grant by rejecting the condition that tenure be
granted.

In 1970, the newly formed Rutgers Medical School hired major faculty
members from other institutions. In 1971, the Governor's Office
separated Rutgers Medical School from Rutgers University and made it
part of New Jersey College of Medicine and Dentistry, and many faculty
left the Medical School, including the dean of the Medical School, Dr.
Dewitt Stetten, who later became the Director of the National Institutes
of Health. As a result of the separation of the Medical School from
Rutgers University, graduate PhD programs that had been started in the
medical center were lost, and students had to seek other institutions to
finish their degrees. After the dissolution of the New Jersey College of
Medicine and Dentistry in 2013, the medical school again became part of
the university.

Although Rutgers is a public university, it retains—as the successor to
the private college founded and chartered in 1766—some important private
rights and protections from unilateral state efforts to change its
fundamental character and mission.

Today
=====

-   *In 2013, most of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
    Jersey was integrated with Rutgers University and, along with
    several existing Rutgers units, was reformed as Rutgers Biomedical
    and Health Sciences.*

-   *This merger attached the New Jersey Medical School and Robert Wood
    Johnson Medical School to Rutgers University.*

Prior to 1982, separate liberal arts faculties existed in the several
separate "residential colleges" (Rutgers, Douglass, Livingston,
University, and Cook colleges) at Rutgers–New Brunswick.

In 1982, under president Edward J. Bloustein, the liberal arts faculties
of these five institutions were centralized into one college, the
Faculty of Arts and Sciences, which itself had no students. The separate
residential colleges persisted for students, and while instructors for
classes were now drawn from the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, separate
standards for admission, good standing, and graduation still continued
for students, depending on which residential college they were enrolled
in.

In the fall of 2007, Rutgers, Douglass, Livingston, and University
Colleges, along with the Faculty of Arts and Sciences were merged into
the new "School of Arts and Sciences" with one set of admissions
criteria, curriculum, and graduation requirements. At this time, the
liberal arts components of Cook College were absorbed into the School of
Arts and Sciences as well, while the other aspects of that college
remained, but as the School of Environmental and Biological Sciences.
These changes in 2007 ended the 241-year history of Rutgers College as a
distinct institution.

Students at the 2011 Rutgers Tuition Protests fought against rising
education costs and diminished state subsidies. Campus groups (including
the Rutgers Student Union, the Rutgers One Coalition and the Rutgers
University Student Assembly (RUSA), supported by New Jersey United
Students (NJUS), mobilized to keep the increase in annual student
financial obligation to a minimum through marches, sit-ins, letters to
administration officials and forums.

In 2013, most of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
was integrated with Rutgers University and, along with several existing
Rutgers units, was reformed as Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences.
This merger attached the New Jersey Medical School and Robert Wood
Johnson Medical School to Rutgers University.

On June 20, 2012, the outgoing president of Rutgers University, Richard
L. McCormick announced that Rutgers will "...integrate five acres along
George Street between Seminary Place and Bishop Place into the College
Avenue Campus." Most of the block had been occupied by the New Brunswick
Theological Seminary. Rutgers agreed to rebuild the seminary in exchange
for the land it gave up.

In 2013, Rutgers changed part of its alma mater, "On the Banks of the
Old Raritan". Where the lyrics had stated, "My father sent me to old
Rutgers, and resolved that I should be a man," now they state, "From far
and near we came to Rutgers, and resolved to learn all that we can."

Rutgers celebrated its 250th anniversary in 2016. On May 15 President
Barack Obama became first sitting president to speak at the university's
commencement.\[32\]\[full citation needed\] The university held a
variety of celebrations, academic programs, and commemorative events
which culminated on the 250th anniversary date, November 10, 2016.
Rutgers invited multiple notable alumni from around the world to the
celebration. Today Rutgers enjoys global influence with alumni rooted
around the globe. Rutgers also has close ties to figures who grew up or
continue to live in New Jersey with notable figures such as Chris
Christie, justices Antonin Scalia and Samuel Alito, and Alice Waters
each having a parent who attended the institution.

In November 2016, Rutgers released research findings that revealed "an
untold history of some of the institution’s founders as slave owners and
the displacement of the Native Americans who once occupied land that was
later transferred to the college."

Organization and administration
===============================

University president
====================

-   *Two presidents were alumni of Rutgers College—the Rev.*

-   *Barchi assumed the office on September 1, 2012 and his tenure has
    so far involved overseeing the university's acquisition of a medical
    school and related research and clinical facilities after a merger
    with the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, a
    redevelopment of the College Avenue Campus, and a transition of the
    Scarlet Knights athletic program to the Big Ten Conference
    (beginning in 2014).*

Since 1785, twenty men have served as the institution's president,
beginning with the Reverend Jacob Rutsen Hardenbergh, a Dutch Reformed
clergyman who was responsible for establishing the college. Before 1930,
most of the university's presidents were clergymen affiliated with
Christian denominations in the Reformed tradition (either Dutch
Reformed, Presbyterian, or German Reformed). Two presidents were alumni
of Rutgers College—the Rev. William H. S. Demarest (Class of 1883) and
Philip Milledoler Brett (Class of 1892).

The current president is Robert L. Barchi, M.D., Ph.D. (b. 1946), a
neuroscientist and board-certified physician. Dr. Barchi previously
served as president of the Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia
and as provost of the University of Pennsylvania before being appointed
by the university's two governing boards on April 11, 2012 to succeed
outgoing president Richard L. McCormick (b. 1947), the son of dean
Richard P. McCormick. Barchi assumed the office on September 1, 2012 and
his tenure has so far involved overseeing the university's acquisition
of a medical school and related research and clinical facilities after a
merger with the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, a
redevelopment of the College Avenue Campus, and a transition of the
Scarlet Knights athletic program to the Big Ten Conference (beginning in
2014).

The president serves in an ex officio capacity as a presiding officer
within the university's 59-member board of trustees and its
eleven-member board of governors, and is appointed by these boards to
oversee day-to-day operations of the university across its campuses. He
is charged with implementing "board policies with the help and advice of
senior administrators and other members of the university community."
The president is responsible only to those two governing boards—there is
no oversight by state officials. Frequently, the president also occupies
a professorship in his academic discipline and engages in instructing
students.

Governing boards
================

-   *The trustees constitute chiefly an advisory body to the board of
    governors and are the fiduciary overseers of the property and assets
    of the university that existed before the institution became the
    State University of New Jersey in 1945.*

-   *Governance at Rutgers University rests with a Board of Trustees
    consisting of 41 members, and a Board of Governors consisting of 15
    voting members: 8 appointed by the Governor of New Jersey and 7
    chosen by and from among the Board of Trustees.*

Governance at Rutgers University rests with a Board of Trustees
consisting of 41 members, and a Board of Governors consisting of 15
voting members: 8 appointed by the Governor of New Jersey and 7 chosen
by and from among the Board of Trustees. The trustees constitute chiefly
an advisory body to the board of governors and are the fiduciary
overseers of the property and assets of the university that existed
before the institution became the State University of New Jersey in
1945. The initial reluctance of the trustees (still acting as a private
corporate body) to cede control of certain business affairs to the state
government for direction and oversight caused the state to establish the
board of governors in 1956. Today, the board of governors maintains much
of the corporate control of the university.

The members of the Board of Trustees are voted upon by different
constituencies or appointed. "Two faculty and two students are elected
by the University Senate as nonvoting representatives. The 59 voting
members are chosen in the following way as mandated by state law: 20
charter members (of whom at least three shall be women), 16 alumni
members nominated by the Nominating Committee of the Board of Trustees,
and five public members appointed by the governor of the state with
confirmation by the New Jersey State Senate.

Affiliations
============

-   *Universities Research Association*

-   *Big Ten Conference*

-   *Big Ten Academic Alliance*

-   *Association of American Universities*

-   *Association of Public and Land-grant Universities*

-   *Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools*

Association of American Universities

Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools

Big Ten Academic Alliance

Universities Research Association

Association of Public and Land-grant Universities

Big Ten Conference

Locations and divisions
=======================

-   *Rutgers University has three campuses in the state of New Jersey.*

-   *The New Brunswick Campus, located in the city of New Brunswick and
    adjacent Piscataway, is the largest campus of the university.*

Rutgers University has three campuses in the state of New Jersey. The
New Brunswick Campus, located in the city of New Brunswick and adjacent
Piscataway, is the largest campus of the university. The Newark Campus
in Newark and the Camden Campus in Camden are located in the northern
and southern parts of the state, respectively. Combined, these campuses
comprise 33 degree-granting schools and colleges, offering
undergraduate, graduate and professional levels of study. The university
is centrally administered from New Brunswick, although Chancellors at
the Newark and Camden campuses hold significant autonomy for some
academic issues.

Rutgers–New Brunswick
=====================

-   *The New Brunswick-Piscataway campus includes a new state-of-the-art
    Business School building on the Livingston Campus that accommodates
    a growing number of students pursuing a business degree.*

-   *Rutgers Campus Buses transport students between the various
    campuses.*

-   *The New Brunswick Campus (or Rutgers–New Brunswick) is the largest
    campus and the site of the original Rutgers College.*

The New Brunswick Campus (or Rutgers–New Brunswick) is the largest
campus and the site of the original Rutgers College. Spread across six
municipalities in Middlesex County, New Jersey, it lies chiefly in the
City of New Brunswick and adjacent Piscataway, and is composed of five
smaller campuses and a few buildings in downtown New Brunswick. The
historic College Avenue Campus is close to downtown New Brunswick and
includes the seat of the University, Old Queens and other
nineteenth-century and early twentieth-century buildings that constitute
the Queens Campus and Voorhees Mall. Its proximity to New Brunswick's
train station and numerous food vendors located downtown, in addition to
a large amount of off-campus housing and fraternity and sorority houses
make this a popular weekend destination. Across the city, Douglass
Campus and Cook Campus are intertwined with each other and are often
referred to collectively as the Cook/Douglass Campus. Cook Campus has
extensive farms and woods that reach into North Brunswick and East
Brunswick. Separated by the Raritan River are Busch Campus, in
Piscataway, and Livingston Campus, also mainly in Piscataway but
including remote sections of land extending into Edison and the Borough
of Highland Park. The Busch Campus is noted as the home of Rutgers'
highly ranked Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, as well as the golf
course and football stadium. The Livingston campus is home to the RAC, a
trapezoidal building which currently acts as home for many sports teams,
notably the Men's Basketball Team. Additionally, this campus has
undergone many renovations and is regarded as the most "modern" campus.
The campus entrance is delineated by an all-glass business building
known as the "100 Rock". From this building's fifth floor lounge, one
can see the distant skyline of New York City on many clear days.
Featuring (arguably) the best dining hall and top notch housing,
Livingston attracts many students who may want a quieter city-life
experience than the one on College Avenue. Rutgers Campus Buses
transport students between the various campuses.

As of Fall 2010, the New Brunswick-Piscataway campuses include 19
undergraduate, graduate and professional schools, including the School
of Arts and Sciences, the School of Communication and Information, the
Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy, the School of
Engineering, the School of Environmental and Biological Sciences, the
Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, the Graduate School, the Graduate
School of Applied and Professional Psychology, the Graduate School of
Education, the School of Management and Labor Relations, Mason Gross
School of the Arts, the College of Nursing, the Rutgers Business School
and the School of Social Work. As of 2012\[update\], 40,434 students
(31,593 undergraduates and 8,841 graduate students) were enrolled at the
New Brunswick-Piscataway campus. The New Brunswick-Piscataway campus
includes a new state-of-the-art Business School building on the
Livingston Campus that accommodates a growing number of students
pursuing a business degree.

Rutgers–Newark
==============

-   *The Newark Campus (or Rutgers–Newark) consists of eight
    undergraduate, graduate and professional schools, including: Newark
    College of Arts and Sciences, University College, School of Criminal
    Justice, Graduate School, School of Nursing, School of Public
    Affairs and Administration, Rutgers Business School and the Newark
    location of the Rutgers Law School.*

The Newark Campus (or Rutgers–Newark) consists of eight undergraduate,
graduate and professional schools, including: Newark College of Arts and
Sciences, University College, School of Criminal Justice, Graduate
School, School of Nursing, School of Public Affairs and Administration,
Rutgers Business School and the Newark location of the Rutgers Law
School. As of 2012\[update\], 7,666 undergraduates and 4,345 graduate
students (total 12,011) are enrolled at the Newark campus.

Rutgers–Camden
==============

-   *The Camden Campus (or Rutgers–Camden) consists of five
    undergraduate, graduate and professional schools, including: Camden
    College of Arts and Sciences, University College, Graduate School,
    Rutgers School of Business – Camden and the Camden location of the
    Rutgers Law School..*

The Camden Campus (or Rutgers–Camden) consists of five undergraduate,
graduate and professional schools, including: Camden College of Arts and
Sciences, University College, Graduate School, Rutgers School of
Business – Camden and the Camden location of the Rutgers Law School..
The schools are located in the Cooper's Grant and Central Waterfront
neighborhoods of Camden. As of 2012\[update\], 4,708 undergraduates and
1,635 graduate students (total 6,343) are enrolled at the Camden campus.

Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences
======================================

-   *The organization was incorporated into the university following the
    2013 merger of Rutgers and the UMDNJ.*

-   *The Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences (RBHS) is a division of
    the university that serves as an umbrella organization for schools,
    centers, and institutes from Rutgers University and the old
    University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.*

The Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences (RBHS) is a division of the
university that serves as an umbrella organization for schools, centers,
and institutes from Rutgers University and the old University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. The organization was incorporated
into the university following the 2013 merger of Rutgers and the UMDNJ.
While its various facilities are spread across several locations
statewide, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences is considered a
"campus" for certain organizational purposes, such as the appointment of
a separate Chancellor.

RBHS comprises nine schools and other research centers and institutes
including; Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Institute for Health, Health Care Policy and Aging
Research, New Jersey Medical School, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
College of Nursing, School of Nursing, School of Dental Medicine, School
of Health Related Professions, the School of Public Health, Cancer
Institute of New Jersey, Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine,
Environmental and the Occupational Health Sciences Institute. The
programs are offered at different location sites across New Jersey in
New Brunswick, Newark, Camden, Stratford and Scotch Plains.

Rutgers-Online
==============

-   *As of Fall 2015, Rutgers offers a total of 11 fully online degree
    programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels.*

-   *Online degree programs at Rutgers must meet the same academic
    expectations, in terms of both teaching and learning outcomes, as
    traditional on-campus programs.*

-   *An integral part of the institution's academic fabric, and a
    priority in the university's strategic development initiatives,
    these programs constitute, collectively, "Rutgers Online."*

As of Fall 2015, Rutgers offers a total of 11 fully online degree
programs at the undergraduate and graduate levels. An integral part of
the institution's academic fabric, and a priority in the university's
strategic development initiatives, these programs constitute,
collectively, "Rutgers Online." Online degree programs at Rutgers must
meet the same academic expectations, in terms of both teaching and
learning outcomes, as traditional on-campus programs.

Off-campus
==========

-   *These partnerships are designed to enable students to achieve a
    seamless transfer to Rutgers, and to take all of their Rutgers
    classes in a select number of the most popular majors at the
    community college campus.*

-   *Rutgers offers classes at several off-campus sites in affiliation
    with community colleges and other state colleges throughout New
    Jersey.*

Rutgers offers classes at several off-campus sites in affiliation with
community colleges and other state colleges throughout New Jersey. These
partnerships are designed to enable students to achieve a seamless
transfer to Rutgers, and to take all of their Rutgers classes in a
select number of the most popular majors at the community college
campus. The collaborative effort provides access to Rutgers faculty
teaching Rutgers courses, at a convenient location, but it is also one
of the few programs that cater exclusively to the non-traditional
student population. Rutgers' current partners include Atlantic Cape,
Brookdale, Mercer, Morris, and Raritan Valley community colleges.

Academics
=========

Profile
=======

-   *The state legislature designated Rutgers to be New Jersey's state
    university by acts passed in 1945 and 1956.*

-   *Established in 1766, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey is
    one of the nine colonial chartered colleges established before the
    American Revolution.*

-   *In 1864, the New Jersey Legislature selected Rutgers as New
    Jersey's sole land-grant college which expanded the school's
    offerings in the fields of practical agriculture, science, military
    science and engineering.*

Established in 1766, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey is one
of the nine colonial chartered colleges established before the American
Revolution. In 1864, the New Jersey Legislature selected Rutgers as New
Jersey's sole land-grant college which expanded the school's offerings
in the fields of practical agriculture, science, military science and
engineering. The state legislature designated Rutgers to be New Jersey's
state university by acts passed in 1945 and 1956. It is the only
university in the United States able to boast all three designations.
The university offers more than 100 distinct bachelor, 100 master, and
80 doctoral and professional degree programs across 175 academic
departments, 29 degree-granting schools and colleges, 16 of which offer
graduate programs of study.

Rutgers is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the
Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools (1921), and in 1989,
became a member of the Association of American Universities, an
organization of the 62 leading research universities in North America.
Rutgers–New Brunswick is classified by the Carnegie Foundation as
"RU/VH", which stands for Research Intensive University, Very High
research activity. Rutgers–Newark is classified by the same organization
as "RU/H", meaning Research Intensive University, High research activity
and Rutgers–Camden is given the classification of "Master's M",
signifying the university's inclusion in the Master's Colleges and
Universities category as a medium-sized institution.

Libraries
=========

-   *The Rutgers University Libraries (RUL) system consists of
    twenty-six libraries, centers and reading rooms located on the
    University's four campuses.*

-   *Special Collections and University Archives houses the Sinclair New
    Jersey Collection, manuscript collection, and rare book collection,
    as well as the University Archives.*

The Rutgers University Libraries (RUL) system consists of twenty-six
libraries, centers and reading rooms located on the University's four
campuses. Housing a collection that includes 4,383,848 volumes (print
and electronic), 4,605,896 microforms, as well as a wide array of
electronic indexes and abstracts, full-text electronic journals, and
research guides, Rutgers University Libraries ranks among the nation's
top research libraries. The American Library Association ranks the
Rutgers University Library system as the 44th largest library in the
United States in terms of volumes held.

The Archibald S. Alexander Library in New Brunswick is the oldest and
the largest library of the University, and houses an extensive
humanities and social science collection. It also supports the work of
faculty and staff at four professional schools: the Edward J. Bloustein
School of Planning and Public Policy, the Graduate School of Education,
the Graduate School of Social Work, and the School of Communication and
Information. Alexander Library is also a Federal Depository Library,
maintaining a large collection of government documents, which contains
United States, New Jersey, foreign, and international government
publications. The Library of Science and Medicine (LSM) on the Busch
Campus in Piscataway houses the University's collection in behavioral,
biological, earth, and pharmaceutical sciences and engineering. LSM also
serves as a designated depository library for government publication
regarding science, and owns a U.S. patent collection and patent search
facility. It was officially established as the Library of Science and
Medicine in July 1964 although the beginning of the development of a
library for science started in 1962. The current character of LSM is a
university science library also serving a medical school. On the New
Brunswick-Piscataway campus, in addition to Alexander Library, many
individual disciplines have their own libraries, including Alcohol
Studies, Art History, Chemistry, Mathematics, Music, and Physics.
Special Collections and University Archives houses the Sinclair New
Jersey Collection, manuscript collection, and rare book collection, as
well as the University Archives. Although located in the Alexander
Library building, Special Collections and University Archives actually
comprises a distinct unit unto itself. Also located within the Alexander
Library is the East Asian Library which holds a sizable collection of
Chinese, Japanese and Korean monographs and periodicals. In Newark, the
John Cotton Dana Library, which includes the Institute of Jazz Studies,
and the Paul Robeson Library in Camden, serve their respective campuses
with a broad collection of volumes. Individual items and collections
within the Libraries can be identified using the Integrated Rutgers
Information System.

Museums and collections
=======================

-   *Rutgers oversees several museums and collections that are open to
    the public.*

-   *Rutgers University Geology Museum in Geology Hall features exhibits
    on geology and anthropology, with an emphasis on the natural history
    of New Jersey.*

-   *New Jersey Museum of Agriculture on Cook Campus, houses an
    extensive collection of agricultural, scientific and household tools
    that spans 350 years of New Jersey's history.*

Rutgers oversees several museums and collections that are open to the
public.

Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum, on the College Avenue Campus
maintains a collection of over 60,000 works of art, focusing on Russian
and Soviet art, French 19th-century art and American 19th- and
20th-century art with a concentration on early-20th-century and
contemporary prints.

Rutgers University Geology Museum in Geology Hall features exhibits on
geology and anthropology, with an emphasis on the natural history of New
Jersey. The largest exhibits include a dinosaur trackway from Towaco,
New Jersey; a mastodon from Salem County; and a Ptolemaic era Egyptian
mummy.

New Jersey Museum of Agriculture on Cook Campus, houses an extensive
collection of agricultural, scientific and household tools that spans
350 years of New Jersey's history. The bulk of the collection rests on
the 8,000-item Wabun C. Krueger Collection of Agricultural, Household,
and Scientific Artifacts, and over 30,000 glass negatives and historic
photographs. This has since been closed.

Rutgers Gardens, which features 50 acres (20 ha) of horticultural,
display, and botanical gardens, as well as arboretums.

Edison Papers, is a collection of roughly 5 million documents related to
Thomas Alva Edison. Nearly 175,000 of these documents are digitized and
available to be viewed through their website

Rutgers' facilities across the four campuses include a golf course,
botanical gardens, working agricultural, horse, dairy, and sustainable
farms, a creamery, an ecological preserve with multiple use trails,
television and radio studios, theaters, museums, athletic facilities,
helipads, a makerspace, and more.

Admissions and financial aid
============================

-   *As a state university, Rutgers charges two separate rates for
    tuition and fees depending on an enrolled student's residency.*

-   *U.S. News & World Report considers the New Brunswick campus of
    Rutgers University to be a "more selective" school in terms of the
    rigor of its admissions processes.*

-   *The program targets students from the school systems of Rutgers's
    hometowns, New Brunswick/Piscataway, Newark, and Camden.*

U.S. News & World Report considers the New Brunswick campus of Rutgers
University to be a "more selective" school in terms of the rigor of its
admissions processes. For the Class of 2017 (enrolling fall 2013), the
New Brunswick campus received 30,631 applications and accepted 18,230
(59.5%). The number enrolling was 6,402; the yield rate (the percentage
of accepted students who enroll) was 35.1%. The middle 50% range of SAT
scores was 520–640 for critical reading, 570–690 for math, and 540–650
for writing. For the Class of 2020 (enrolling fall 2016), the New
Brunswick campus accepted 58% of the 35,340 applicants. The number
enrolling was 7,706; the yield rate was 37%.

As a state university, Rutgers charges two separate rates for tuition
and fees depending on an enrolled student's residency. The Office of
Institutional Research and Academic Planning estimates that costs
in-state student of attending Rutgers would amount to \$25,566 for an
undergraduate living on-campus and \$30,069 for a graduate student. For
an out-of-state student, the costs rise to \$38,228 and \$39,069
respectively. As of the 2012–2013 academic school year, the cost of
attendance for in-state students is \$13,073, \$26,393 for out-of-state
students and \$11,412 for Room and Board.

In the 2010–2011 academic year, undergraduate students at Rutgers,
through a combination of federal (53.5%), state (23.6%), university
(18.1%), and private (4.8%) scholarship, loans, and grants, received
\$492,260,845 of financial aid. 81.4% of all undergraduates, or 34,473
students, received some form of financial aid. During the same period,
graduate students, through a combination of federal (61.9%), state
(1.8%), university (34.5%), and private (1.9%) scholarship, loans, and
grants received \$182,384,256 of financial aid. 81.5% of all graduate
students, or 11,852 students received some form of financial aid.

In 2007, the university's office for Enrollment Management launched the
Rutgers Future Scholars Program as an initiative to help 7th graders
from low-income families achieve academic success and be the first in
their families to go to college. The program targets students from the
school systems of Rutgers's hometowns, New Brunswick/Piscataway, Newark,
and Camden. Once admitted, the students receive mentoring and college
prep courses each summer leading up to the year of their college
applications. If admitted to the university, they are given a full
tuition scholarship for four years of undergraduate study. The program
has been very successful and currently admits as many as 200 new 7th
graders each year with the most of the original 200 now attending the
University as undergraduates.

Rankings
========

-   *Under the New Jersey Medical and Health Sciences Education
    Restructuring Act of 2012, the University of Medicine and Dentistry
    of New Jersey was dissolved.*

-   *Most of its schools, including Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
    New Jersey Medical School, and New Jersey Dental School, were merged
    into the new Rutgers School of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
    formed in 2013.*

The university was ranked 48th in the United States and 96th worldwide
in the 2016 Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU), while ranking
24th nationwide and 33rd in the world in the 2014 Center for World
University Rankings.

In the 2019 U.S. News & World Report ranking of American national
universities (public and private), Rutgers is tied for 56th and among
public universities ranked 17th. The same ranking placed Rutgers in the
top 25 among all U.S. universities for the following graduate school
programs: Library Science (7th), English (15th), History (21st) (with
the subspecialties of Women's History and African-American History both
ranked 1st), Social Work (22nd), and Mathematics (23rd). It also ranked
Rutgers 22nd in the world for Agricultural Sciences.

In 2003, the Wall Street Journal conducted a study of the undergraduate
institutions that most frequently feed students placements at elite
professional and graduate programs, such as Columbia, Yale and Harvard;
Rutgers was ranked 20th in the rankings they compiled for state
universities. On a side note, Forbes ranked Rutgers as being the 20th
best public university in the United States for "getting rich", as
judged by its students' median salaries upon graduation.

Eleven of Rutgers' graduate departments are ranked by the National
Research Council in the top 25 among all universities: Philosophy (2nd),
Geology (ranked 9th nationally based on NSF funding), Geography (13th),
Statistics (17th), English (17th), Mathematics (19th), Art History
(20th), Physics (20th), History (20th) Comparative Literature (22nd),
French (22nd), and Materials Science Engineering (25th).

Rutgers Business School (RBS) was ranked 39th in the 2006 Wall Street
Journal Ranking of Top Business Schools. The full-time Master of
Business Administration (M.B.A.) program was ranked 48th in the United
States in 2015 by U.S. News and World Report. It has specialities in the
Pharma, Biotech and Healthcare industries. The RBS Master of
Quantitative Finance (M.Q.F.) program, and the Master of Mathematical
Finance (M.S.M.F) program in the Department of Mathematics, are ranked
7th in the United States.

The Philosophy Department was ranked tied for first in 2002–04, and
second in 2004–06 in the Philosophical Gourmet biennial report on
Philosophy programs in the English-speaking world.

The Division of Global Affairs (DGA) Ph.D. program at Rutgers
University-Newark was ranked fifth in the nation in the Benchmarking
Academic Excellence survey of Top Universities in Social and Behavioral
Sciences Disciplines in the combined category of International Affairs
and Development for 2006–07.

In 2010, the Wall Street Journal ranked Rutgers University \#21 in
schools whose graduates are top-rated by recruiters.

Under the New Jersey Medical and Health Sciences Education Restructuring
Act of 2012, the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey was
dissolved. Most of its schools, including Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, New Jersey Medical School, and New Jersey Dental School, were
merged into the new Rutgers School of Biomedical and Health Sciences,
formed in 2013.

Study abroad
============

-   *Rutgers global offers more than 180 study and service-learning
    programs to more than 50 countries for all majors.*

-   *Rutgers also hosts students from universities around the globe.*

-   *Rutgers study abroad program has been offering opportunities for
    international study for over 50 years.*

Rutgers study abroad program has been offering opportunities for
international study for over 50 years. Rutgers global offers more than
180 study and service-learning programs to more than 50 countries for
all majors. These programs range from short term summer programs to long
term semester programs. Often scholarships and financial support is
offered to students who wish to study abroad. Rutgers also hosts
students from universities around the globe.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="4.48799978127734in" height="5.5in"}\
*Prof. Selman A. Waksman (B.Sc. 1915), who was awarded the Nobel Prize
in Medicine for developing 22 antibiotics—most notably Streptomycin—in
his laboratory at Rutgers University*

Research
========

-   *Rutgers is home to the Rutgers Cooperative Research & Extension
    office, which is run by the Agricultural and Experiment Station with
    the support of local government.*

-   *Rutgers University Cell and DNA Repository (RUCDR) is the largest
    university based repository in the world and has received awards
    worth more than \$57.8 million from the National Institutes of
    Health (NIH).*

-   *Rutgers is home to the Rutgers University Center for Cognitive
    Science, also known as RUCCS.*

Rutgers is home to the Rutgers University Center for Cognitive Science,
also known as RUCCS. Researchers in psychology, linguistics, computer
science, philosophy, electrical engineering, and anthropology combine
resources to advance the study of the mind at this state of the art
institution.

It was at Rutgers that Selman Waksman (1888–1973) discovered several
antibiotics, including actinomycin, clavacin, streptothricin, grisein,
neomycin, fradicin, candicidin, candidin, and others. Waksman, along
with graduate student Albert Schatz (1920–2005), discovered
streptomycin—a versatile antibiotic that was to be the first applied to
cure tuberculosis. For this discovery, Waksman received the Nobel Prize
for Medicine in 1952.

Rutgers developed water-soluble sustained release polymers, tetraploids,
robotic hands, artificial bovine insemination, and the ceramic tiles for
the heat shield on the Space Shuttle. In health related field, Rutgers
has the Environmental & Occupational Health Science Institute (EOHSI).

Rutgers is also home to the RCSB Protein Data bank, 'an information
portal to Biological Macromolecular Structures' cohosted with the San
Diego Supercomputer Center. This database is the authoritative research
tool for bioinformaticists using protein primary, secondary and tertiary
structures worldwide.'

Rutgers is home to the Rutgers Cooperative Research & Extension office,
which is run by the Agricultural and Experiment Station with the support
of local government. The institution provides research & education to
the local farming and agro industrial community in 19 of the 21 counties
of the state and educational outreach programs offered through the New
Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station Office of Continuing Professional
Education.

Rutgers University Cell and DNA Repository (RUCDR) is the largest
university based repository in the world and has received awards worth
more than \$57.8 million from the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
One will fund genetic studies of mental disorders and the other will
support investigations into the causes of digestive, liver and kidney
diseases, and diabetes. RUCDR activities will enable gene discovery
leading to diagnoses, treatments and, eventually, cures for these
diseases. RUCDR assists researchers throughout the world by providing
the highest quality biomaterials, technical consultation, and logistical
support.

Rutgers–Camden is home to the nation's PhD granting Department of
Childhood Studies. This department, in conjunction with the Center for
Children and Childhood Studies, also on the Camden campus, conducts
interdisciplinary research which combines methodologies and research
practices of sociology, psychology, literature, anthropology and other
disciplines into the study of childhoods internationally.

Rutgers is home to several National Science Foundation IGERT fellowships
that support interdisciplinary scientific research at the
graduate-level. Highly selective fellowships are available in the
following areas: Perceptual Science, Stem Cell Science and Engineering,
Nanotechnology for Clean Energy, Renewable and Sustainable Fuels
Solutions, and Nanopharmaceutical Engineering.

Rutgers also maintains the Office of Research Alliances that focuses on
working with companies to increase engagement with the university's
faculty members, staff and extensive resources on the four campuses.

Student life
============

![](media/image2.JPG){width="5.5in" height="4.125in"}\
*Demarest Hall dormitory*

Residential life
================

-   *The Rutgers bus system is the second largest bus service in New
    Jersey, and one of the largest in the country.*

-   *Rutgers University offers a variety of housing options.*

-   *Rutgers University's four campuses are in the culturally-diverse,
    redeveloping urban areas (Newark, Camden, and New Brunswick) with
    convenient access to New York City and Philadelphia by either
    automobile, Amtrak or New Jersey Transit.*

Rutgers University offers a variety of housing options. On the New
Brunswick-Piscataway campus, students are given the option of on-campus
housing in both traditional dorms or apartments. Freshman students,
however, are allowed only a dorm, while upperclassmen have a wider array
of on-campus housing choices, like apartments, but must apply for
on-campus housing through the Rutgers online lottery process. Most
students seeking on-campus housing will be accommodated with a space and
sophomores are guaranteed housing. Many Rutgers students opt to rent
apartments or houses off-campus within the city of New Brunswick.
Similar setups are to be found in Rutgers–Newark and Rutgers–Camden,
however a substantial portion of the students on those campuses commute
and/or are enrolled on a part-time basis.

Rutgers University's four campuses are in the culturally-diverse,
redeveloping urban areas (Newark, Camden, and New Brunswick) with
convenient access to New York City and Philadelphia by either
automobile, Amtrak or New Jersey Transit. US News & World Report ranked
Rutgers–Newark the most diverse university campus in the United States.
Because the area of Rutgers' New Brunswick-Piscataway campus—which is
composed of several constituent colleges and professional schools—is
sprawled across six municipalities, the individual campuses are
connected by an inter-campus bus system. The Rutgers bus system is the
second largest bus service in New Jersey, and one of the largest in the
country.

Security and emergency services
===============================

-   *Services provided by the university include Rutgers Police,
    Emergency Medical Services, an emergency management office, bus and
    shuttle service, inter- and intra-campus mail, and occupational and
    environmental health and safety.*

Services provided by the university include Rutgers Police, Emergency
Medical Services, an emergency management office, bus and shuttle
service, inter- and intra-campus mail, and occupational and
environmental health and safety.

Student organizations and activities
====================================

-   *Rutgers University has a student government which controls funding
    to student groups.*

-   *The New Brunswick campus of Rutgers University has a chapter of the
    only active co-ed pre-medical fraternity, Phi Delta Epsilon, as of
    2008\[update\].*

-   *Rutgers has four vocal ensembles: Voorhees Choir (the university's
    women's ensemble), Kirkpatrick Choir (the university's most
    selective coed ensemble), Glee Club (the university's most esteemed
    male ensemble), and University Choir (a larger mixed choir).*

Rutgers University has a student government which controls funding to
student groups. The student government is made up of campus councils and
professional school councils. Those councils then send representatives
to the student assembly as well as the university senate. An example of
these campus councils is the University College Council, which
represents adult, part-time, and military veteran students.

Rutgers hosts over 700 student organizations; among the first student
groups was the first college newspaper in the United States. The
Political Intelligencer and New Jersey Adviser began publication at
Queen's College in 1783, and ceased operation in 1785. Continuing this
tradition is the university's current college newspaper, The Daily
Targum, established in 1869, which is the second-oldest college
newspaper published in the United States, after The Dartmouth (1843).
Both poet Joyce Kilmer and economist Milton Friedman served as editors.
Also included are The Medium, a weekly satirical newspaper billed as
Rutgers Entertainment Weekly, Rutgers Centurion, a conservative
newspaper, the Rutgers University Glee Club, a male choral singing group
established in 1872 (among the oldest in the country). Rutgers a
cappella groups have routinely placed well in the International
Championship of Collegiate A Cappella, including 2010 when The
OrphanSporks placed second in the semifinals. Governed by the Rutgers
University Student Assembly and funded by student fees, students can
organize groups for practically any political ideology or issue, ethnic
or religious affiliation, academic subject, activity, or hobby.

Rutgers University is home to chapters of many Greek organizations, and
a significant percentage of the undergraduate student body is active in
Greek life. Several fraternities and sororities maintain houses for
their chapters in the area of Union Street (known familiarly as "Frat
Row") in New Brunswick, within blocks of Rutgers' College Avenue Campus.
Chapters of Zeta Psi and Delta Phi organized at Rutgers as early as
1845. The Alpha Rho chapter of Chi Psi fraternity, founded at Rutgers
College in 1879, was the first fraternity at Rutgers to own a fraternity
house, or "Lodge", purchased in 1887. The fraternity today still owns
and occupies the same property at 114 College Avenue. Today, there are
over 50 fraternities and sororities on the New Brunswick-Piscataway
campus, ranging from traditional to historically African-American,
Hispanic, Multicultural, and Asian interest organizations. The New
Brunswick campus of Rutgers University has a chapter of the only active
co-ed pre-medical fraternity, Phi Delta Epsilon, as of 2008\[update\].
Greek organizations are governed by the Office of Fraternity and
Sorority Affairs. Twelve organizations maintain chapters in New
Brunswick without sanction by the University's administration. Students
involved in Greek Life must meet academic eligibility requirements
including maintaining a cumulative 2.5 GPA, completion of 12 credits,
and be a currently enrolled full-time student. Some individual
organizations hold a higher GPA requirement.

Many Greek organizations hold fundraising events specific to their
philanthropy. However, it's Rutgers tradition that our students
participate in one of the largest student-run philanthropic events in
New Jersey. All proceeds go to the non-profit organization, Embrace Kids
Foundation. This foundation advocates for children with cancer and blood
disorders. Dance Marathon includes over 400 dancers pledging to stay
away and stand for 32 hours with the support and help of 500 volunteers.
Dance Marathon 2015 collected a record breaking \$692,046.67.

In the late 19th century, the university banned fraternities because of
their unusual hazing practices. This caused them to go underground as
secret societies. It also sparked the interest of some students to
create their own societies. Cap and Skull was founded at Rutgers before
the turn of the 20th century.

Rutgers has four vocal ensembles: Voorhees Choir (the university's
women's ensemble), Kirkpatrick Choir (the university's most selective
coed ensemble), Glee Club (the university's most esteemed male
ensemble), and University Choir (a larger mixed choir).

In 2016, the Iota Psi chapter of Sigma Chi raised a national Greek
record of \$300,007 for the Children's Miracle Network with the help of
seven sororities: Alpha Gamma Delta, Delta Gamma, Gamma Phi Beta, Phi
Sigma Sigma, Sigma Delta Tau, Sigma Kappa, and Zeta Tau Alpha.

Traditions
==========

-   *Attendance for the annual event was about 40,000–50,000, topping
    out at an estimated 65,000 in 2004 at the event which featured Kanye
    West and Sugar Ray The event was staged by the Rutgers University
    Programming Association (RUPA), which used to be known as the
    Rutgers College Programming Committee (RCPC), as a year-end
    celebration before the start of the final examination period.*

-   *The Rutgers Grease Trucks were located in a designated lot for
    nearly two decades until August 2013.*

The Grease Trucks are a group of truck-based food vendors located at
various locations on the New Brunswick campus. They serve traditional
grill fare, Middle-Eastern specialties, and are especially well known
for serving "Fat Sandwiches," a sub roll containing various ingredients
such as cheesesteak, burgers, pork roll, chicken fingers, French fries,
mozzarella sticks, eggs, bacon, gyro meat, and marinara sauce. The
Rutgers Grease Trucks were located in a designated lot for nearly two
decades until August 2013. Truck owners were forced to relocate due to
the construction of an \$84-million student apartment complex. Three
trucks remain on the College Avenue Campus, while the remaining two were
moved to the Cook/Douglass Campus.

The Dance Marathon is a student-run organization that consists of a
year-long series of fundraisers and culminates with the annual Marathon
on April 5–6 in the College Avenue Gym. At the Marathon over 400 dancers
pledge to raise funds and remain standing for 32 hours without sleeping.
The 'Dancers', along with over 500 volunteers and countless visitors,
are entertained by live bands, comedians, prize giveaways, games,
sports, a mechanical bull, computer and internet access, various theme
hours and much more. Rutgers has held this tradition since 1999 and to
date has raised in excess of \$1.3 million for the Embrace Kids
Foundation. In the seventies the Dance Marathon raised funds for the
American Cancer Society. In the Eighties it was the Rutger Cancer
Research Association.

'RutgersFest was a day-long cultural event staged variously on either
Livingston Campus or Busch Campus. It was designed to promote college
spirit through student organization participation with activities and
entertainment throughout the day, culminating with a free concert and
fireworks at night. The event was free to all students and guests and
was funded as part of an elected programming fee paid by all students as
part of tuition. Past musical guests have included: Kanye West,
Everclear, Sugar Ray, Guster, Goldfinger, Ludacris, Reel Big Fish,
Method Man and Redman, Fuel, Third Eye Blind, Hawthorne Heights, NAS,
SR-71, Ok Go, N.E.R.D and Pitbull. The event would feature carnival
attractions such as bungee bull, bouncy boxing, moon walk, electronic
basketball, a recording studio and more. Attendance for the annual event
was about 40,000–50,000, topping out at an estimated 65,000 in 2004 at
the event which featured Kanye West and Sugar Ray The event was staged
by the Rutgers University Programming Association (RUPA), which used to
be known as the Rutgers College Programming Committee (RCPC), as a
year-end celebration before the start of the final examination period.

During its final year in 2011, the festival was held on Busch Campus.
Invited musical guests included Yelawolf, Pitbull, and 3OH!3. Several
violent incidents that year lead to the indefinite cancellation of the
event. President Richard McCormick, in a letter to the Rutgers
community, commented: "The problems that occur following RutgersFest
have grown beyond our capacity to manage them, and the only responsible
course of action is to cancel the event."

Colors, mottos and mascots
==========================

-   *Rutgers University's only school color is scarlet.*

Rutgers University's only school color is scarlet. Students had sought
to make orange the school color, citing Rutgers' Dutch heritage and in
reference to the Prince of Orange. The Rutgers student publication
Targum (which would become the Daily Targum) proposed that scarlet be
adopted in May 1869, claiming that it was a striking color and because
scarlet ribbon was easily obtained. During the first intercollegiate
football game with Princeton on November 6, 1869, the players from
Rutgers wore scarlet-colored turbans and handkerchiefs to distinguish
them as a team from the Princeton players. The Board of Trustees
officially made scarlet the school color in 1900.

In its early days, Rutgers athletes were known informally as "The
Scarlet" in reference to the school color, or as "Queensmen" in
reference to the institution's first name, Queen's College. In 1925, the
mascot was changed to Chanticleer, a fighting rooster from the medieval
fable Reynard the Fox (Le Roman de Renart) which was used by Geoffrey
Chaucer in the Canterbury Tales. At the time, the student humour
magazine at Rutgers was called Chanticleer, and one of its early arts
editors, Ozzie Nelson (later of The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet
fame) was quarterback of the Rutgers team from 1924 to 1926. The
Chanticleer mascot was unveiled at a football game against Lafayette
College, in which Lafayette was also introducing a new mascot, a
leopard. However, the choice of Chanticleer as a mascot was often the
subject of ridicule because of its association with "being chicken." In
1955, the mascot was changed to the Scarlet Knight after a campus-wide
election, beating out other contenders such as "Queensmen", the
"Scarlet", the "Red Lions", the "Redmen" and the "Flying Dutchmen."
Earlier proposed nicknames included "Pioneers" and "Cannoneers". When
Harvey Harman, then coach of the football team, was asked why he
supported changing the Rutgers mascot, he was quoted as saying, "You can
call it the Chanticleer, you can call it a fighting cock, you can call
it any damn thing you want, but everybody knows it's a chicken." Harman
later is said to have bought the first "Scarlet Knight" mascot costume
for the 1955 season, which was to be his final season as football coach
at Rutgers.

![](media/image3.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.596153762029746in"}\
*The Rutgers College football team in 1882*

Athletics
=========

-   *The university has historic rivalries with Princeton University,
    Columbia University (formerly King's College), Lafayette College,
    Lehigh University and New York University originating from the early
    days of college football.*

-   *Rutgers won 29–27.*

-   *Rutgers has a basketball rivalry with Seton Hall University.*

(Note: The Rutgers–Camden athletic teams are called the Scarlet Raptors.
The Rutgers–Newark athletic teams are called the Scarlet Raiders. The
Scarlet Raiders and the Scarlet Raptors both compete within NCAA
Division III.)

Rutgers was among the first American institutions to engage in
intercollegiate athletics, and participated in a small circle of schools
that included Yale University, Columbia University and long-time rival,
Princeton University (then called the College of New Jersey). The four
schools met at the Fifth Avenue Hotel in Manhattan on October 19, 1873,
to establish a set of rules governing their intercollegiate competition,
and particularly to codify the new game of football. Although invited,
Harvard chose not to attend. In the early years of intercollegiate
athletics, the schools that participated in these athletic events were
located solely in the American Northeast. However, by the turn of the
20th century, colleges and universities across the United States began
to participate.

Rutgers University is referred to as "the birthplace of college
football" as the first intercollegiate football game was held on College
Field between Rutgers and Princeton on November 6, 1869, in New
Brunswick, New Jersey on a plot of ground behind where the present-day
College Avenue Gymnasium now stands. Rutgers won the game, with a score
of 6 runs to Princeton's 4. According to Parke H. Davis, the 1869
Rutgers football team shared the national title with Princeton. (This
game is believed to have been closer to soccer than to modern American
football.)

In 1864, rowing became the first organized sport at Rutgers. Six mile
races were held on the Raritan River among six-oared boats. In 1870,
Rutgers held its first intercollegiate competition, against the Lawrence
Scientific School of Harvard, the then top-ranked amateur crew of the
time. Since the start in 1864, Rutgers has built a strong crew program
consisting of heavyweight and lightweight men. Women's crew was added to
the program in 1974. Financial support of the men's crew program was
discontinued by the university in 2006, though the crew continues to
compete (funded entirely by alumni and private support) at a high level
in the prestigious Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges conference.

The first intercollegiate athletic event at Rutgers was a baseball game
on May 2, 1866, against Princeton in which they suffered a 40–2 loss.

Beginning in 1866, Rutgers was unaffiliated with any formal athletic
conference and thus classified as "independent" for eighty years. From
1946 to 1951, the university was a member of the Middle Three
Conference, and from 1958 to 1961, was a member of the Middle Atlantic
Conference. In 1978, the Rutgers Scarlet Knights became a member of the
Atlantic 10 conference. In 1991, it joined the Big East Conference for
football. All sports programs at Rutgers New Brunswick subsequently
became affiliated with the Big East in 1995.

The first intercollegiate competition in Ultimate Frisbee (now called
"Ultimate") was held between students from Rutgers and Princeton on
November 6, 1972, to mark the one hundred third anniversary of the first
intercollegiate football game. Rutgers won 29–27. The Rutgers Scarlet
Knights men's Basketball Team was among the "Final Four" and ended the
1976 season ranked fourth in the United States, after an 86–70 loss
against the University of Michigan in the semifinals, and a 106–92 loss
against UCLA in the consolation round of the 1976 NCAA Men's Division I
Basketball Tournament.

The Rutgers Scarlet Knights are members of the Big Ten Conference, a
collegiate athletic conference consisting of 14 colleges and
universities from the Midwestern and East Coast regions of the United
States. The Big Ten Conference is a member of the Bowl Championship
Series. Rutgers currently fields 27 intercollegiate sports programs and
is a Division I school as sanctioned by the National Collegiate Athletic
Association. Rutgers fields thirty teams in NCAA Division I sanctioned
sports, including football, baseball, basketball, crew, cross country,
fencing, field hockey, golf, gymnastics, lacrosse, soccer, softball,
tennis, track and field, swimming and diving, wrestling, and volleyball.

The Scarlet Knights have won five Big East Conference tournament titles:
men's soccer (1997), men's track & field (2005), baseball (2000, 2007),
and women's basketball (2007). Several other teams have won regular
season titles but failed to win the conference's championship
tournament.

Although the Rutgers Scarlet Knights' football team had losing seasons
in 2016 and 2015 (won-lost records of 2-10 and 4-8, respectively) it
achieved success previously, being invited to the Insight Bowl on
December 27, 2005, in which they lost 45 to 40 against Arizona State
University. This was Rutgers' first bowl appearance since the December
16, 1978, loss against Arizona State, 34–18, at the Garden State Bowl.
The 2006 football season also saw Rutgers being ranked within the Top 25
teams in major college football polls. After the November 9, 2006
victory over the 3rd ranked, undefeated Louisville Cardinals, Rutgers
jumped up to seventh in the AP Poll, eighth in the USA Today/Coaches
poll, seventh in the Harris Interactive Poll, and sixth in the Bowl
Championship Series rankings. These were Rutgers' highest rankings in
the football polls since they were ranked fifteenth in 1961. Rutgers
ended the season 11–2 after winning the inaugural Texas Bowl on December
28, 2006, defeating the Wildcats of Kansas State University by a score
of 37–10 and finishing the season ranked twelfth in the final AP poll of
sportswriters, the team's highest season-ending ranking.

Under Head Coach C. Vivian Stringer, the women's basketball program is
among the elite programs in the country as they remain consistently
ranked in the Top 25, consistently making the NCAA Women's Championship
Tournament, and sometimes winning the Big East regular season
championship. In 2006–2007, the Scarlet Knights won their first ever Big
East Conference Tournament Championship. The program has been highly
competitive since its inception, winning the 1982 AIAW National
Championship, reaching the 2000 Final Four, and reaching the Final Four
and national championship game in 2007.

The Scarlet Knights maintain athletic rivalries with other collegiate
institutions. The university has historic rivalries with Princeton
University, Columbia University (formerly King's College), Lafayette
College, Lehigh University and New York University originating from the
early days of college football. While they maintain this rivalry in
other sports, neither of them has met in football since 1980. Rutgers
has a basketball rivalry with Seton Hall University. Penn State and the
University of Maryland are the two schools with which Rutgers was
developing rivalries with in the Big Ten.

In the fall of 2007, six Rutgers New Brunswick/Piscataway NCAA Division
I sports were discontinued by the University, including men's swimming
and diving, men's heavyweight and lightweight crew, men's tennis, and
men's and women's fencing. Some continued as club teams, while some were
disbanded completely. The University claims this change was due to
budget cuts, while others claim it was a politically motivated move
designed to protest state funding changes.

In November 2012, the Rutgers Scarlet Knights, along with Louisville,
Connecticut, and Cincinnati left the Big East to form the American
Athletic Conference. Syracuse and Pittsburgh have decided to enter the
Atlantic Coast Conference, while West Virginia entered the Big 12
conference, taking effect as of the 2012–2013 season. Rutgers decided to
leave the American for the Big Ten Conference, effective July 1, 2014.
Rutgers surpassed Penn State as the Big Ten's easternmost school.

On March 23, 2019, Nick Suriano and Anthony Ashnault won national titles
for Rutgers Wrestling and provided Rutgers with their first 2 NCAA
wrestling championships.

Notable people
==============

![](media/image4.jpg){width="4.407332677165354in" height="5.5in"}\
*Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman '32 received his B.A. from
Rutgers.*

![](media/image5.jpg){width="3.7620002187226596in" height="5.5in"}\
*Senator Elizabeth Warren received her JD from Rutgers Law School in
1976*

Alumni
======

-   *Rutgers alumni have been influential in many fields.*

-   *Senators Elizabeth Warren (JD) and Bob Menendez (JD) both attended
    Rutgers Law School.*

-   *Among the first students enrolled at Rutgers (when it was Queen's
    College), Simeon De Witt (A.B.*

-   *Seven alumni have served as New Jersey governor; two as president
    of Rutgers; Garret A. Hobart (A.B.*

At Queen's College's first commencement in 1774, one graduate, Matthew
Leydt, received his baccalaureate degree in a brief ceremony.:p.66

Rutgers alumni have been influential in many fields. Singer, athlete,
attorney, and Civil Rights Movement activist Paul Robeson graduated in
1919 and is the namesake of the Paul Robeson Cultural Center on the
Busch Campus. Among the first students enrolled at Rutgers (when it was
Queen's College), Simeon De Witt (A.B. 1776) became the Surveyor-General
for the Continental Army (1776–1783) during the American Revolution:p.67
and classmate James Schureman (A.B. 1775), served in the Continental
Congress and as a United States Senator.:p.66 Two alumni have been
awarded Nobel prizes— Milton Friedman (A.B. 1932) in economics, and
Selman A. Waksman (B.Sc. 1915, M.Sc.1916) in Medicine.:p.300,422 Poet
Robert Pinsky (B.A. 1962) was appointed the nation's poet laureate and
novelist Junot Díaz (B.A. 1992) awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction
in 2008.

Seven alumni have served as New Jersey governor; two as president of
Rutgers; Garret A. Hobart (A.B. 1863) as Vice President of the United
States;:p.137 Louis Freeh (B.A. 1971) as director of the FBI; Frederick
T. Frelinghuysen (A.B. 1836) a U.S. Senator, as U.S. Secretary of
State.:p.88 Alumnus Joseph P. Bradley (A.B. 1836) served for two decades
as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States:p.87
and cast the tie-breaking vote on the bipartisan commission that decided
the contested American presidential election in 1876. Senators Elizabeth
Warren (JD) and Bob Menendez (JD) both attended Rutgers Law School.
Maria Fernanda Espinosa (PhD 1997) is the President of the United
Nations General Assembly.

In business, alumni include: Bernard Marcus (B.S. 1951), founder of
hardware retail company Home Depot; Bill Rasmussen (MBA 1960), founder
of ESPN; and Duncan MacMillan (B.S. 1966), co-founder of financial data
and media company Bloomberg L.P.. In science and technology, alumni
include: Peter C. Schultz (B.S. 1967), co-inventor of fiber optics;
geneticist Stanley N. Cohen (B.Sc. 1956) who pioneered in the field of
gene splicing; and Louis Gluck (B.S. 1930) the "father of neonatology".

Alumni prominent in entertainment include actor James Gandolfini (B.A.
1983) (The Sopranos); chef Mario Batali (B.A. 1982); David Stern (B.A.
1963), former commissioner of the National Basketball Association; Henry
Selick, film director (Disney's The Nightmare Before Christmas); actor
Michael Sorvino; coach Jim Valvano; and actor Sebastian Stan (Captain
America: The Winter Soldier).

Faculty
=======

-   *Noted chef and restaurateur Maricel Presilla taught in the history
    department at Rutgers.*

-   *Avery Brooks, a Rutgers graduate, taught at Mason Gross School of
    the Arts.*

-   *65,000 undergraduate and graduate students currently study at
    Rutgers, instructed by more than 9,000 full-time and part-time
    faculty and supported by more than 15,000 full-time and part-time
    staff members.*

65,000 undergraduate and graduate students currently study at Rutgers,
instructed by more than 9,000 full-time and part-time faculty and
supported by more than 15,000 full-time and part-time staff members.
Former Law professor Ruth Bader Ginsburg currently serves as an
Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States. During his
20-year tenure at Rutgers, David Levering Lewis, a former history
professor, was twice awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Biography or
Autobiography (1994 and 2001) for both volumes of his biography of W. E.
B. Du Bois (1868–1963) and was also the winner of the Bancroft Prize and
the Francis Parkman Prize. Michael R. Douglas, a prominent string
theorist and the director of the New High Energy Theory Center and
winner of the Sackler Prize in theoretical physics in 2000. Noted chef
and restaurateur Maricel Presilla taught in the history department at
Rutgers. Avery Brooks, a Rutgers graduate, taught at Mason Gross School
of the Arts. Jerry Fodor, Zenon Pylyshyn and Stephen Stich were awarded
the Jean Nicod Prize in philosophy and cognitive science.

Many other members of the faculty have received the highest awards in
their fields, including Guggenheim and MacArthur "Genius Award"
fellowships, Pulitzer Prize winners, National Medal of Science and
National Medal of Technology recipients, a National Endowment for the
Arts "Jazz Master," amongst others. As of 2013\[update\], 37 science,
engineering and medical faculty are members of the four "National
Academies"—the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of
Engineering, the Institute of Medicine, and the National Research
Council.

See also
========

-   *List of colleges and universities in New Jersey*

-   *List of Rutgers University presidents*

-   *2011 Rutgers Tuition Protests*

-   *List of Rutgers University people*

2011 Rutgers Tuition Protests

The 2012 Project

List of American state universities

List of Rutgers University people

List of Rutgers University presidents

List of colleges and universities in New Jersey

References
==========

Notes
=====

Citations
=========

Bibliography
============

-   *(New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers College, 1924).*

-   *(New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1966).*

-   *(New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1966),
    70–73.*

-   *History of Rutgers College: 1776–1924.*

-   *History of Rutgers College: or an account of the union of Rutgers
    College, and the Theological Seminary of the General Synod of the
    Reformed Dutch Church.*

H.M. Berman, J. Westbrook, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, T.N. Bhat, H. Weissig,
I.N. Shindyalov, P.E. Bourne: The Protein Data Bank. Nucleic Acids
Research, 28, pp. 235–242 (2000).

Demarest, William Henry Steele. History of Rutgers College: 1776–1924.
(New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers College, 1924).

History of Rutgers College: or an account of the union of Rutgers
College, and the Theological Seminary of the General Synod of the
Reformed Dutch Church. Prepared and published at the request of several
trustees of the College, by a trustee. (New York: Anderson & Smith,
1833).

Lukac, George J. (ed.), Aloud to Alma Mater. (New Brunswick, New Jersey:
Rutgers University Press, 1966), 70–73.

McCormick, Richard P. Rutgers: a Bicentennial History. (New Brunswick,
New Jersey: Rutgers University Press, 1966). ISBN 0-8135-0521-6

Schmidt, George P. Princeton and Rutgers: The Two Colonial Colleges of
New Jersey. (Princeton, New Jersey: Van Nostrand, 1964).

External links
==============

-   *Journal of the Rutgers University Libraries, ISSN 0036-0473 1937–.*

Official website

Official Home of the Scarlet Knights

Official Home of the Scarlet Raiders

Official Home of the Scarlet Raptors

Journal of the Rutgers University Libraries, ISSN 0036-0473 1937–.

Coordinates: 40°30′6″N 74°26′53″W﻿ / ﻿40.50167°N 74.44806°W﻿ / 40.50167;
-74.44806
