**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saudi%20Arabia%E2%80%93United%20States%20relations\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.663409886264217in"}\
*U.S. President Donald Trump with the Saudi Arabia Prince Mohammed bin
Salman in the White House, March 2017.*

Saudi Arabia–United States relations
====================================

-   *After weeks of denial, Saudi Arabia accepted that Khashoggi died at
    the Saudi consulate in Istanbul during a "fistfight."*

-   *Saudi Arabia is listed as the world's 27th largest export economy.*

-   *Saudi Arabia–United States relations refers to the bilateral
    relations between Saudi Arabia and the United States.*

-   *The relationship with Saudi Arabia is not working for America.*

Saudi Arabia–United States relations refers to the bilateral relations
between Saudi Arabia and the United States. It is a Special
Relationship, which began in 1933 when full diplomatic relations were
established. Despite the differences between the two countries—an
ultraconservative Islamic absolute monarchy, and a secular,
constitutional republic—the two countries have been allies. Former
Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama have close and strong
relations with senior members of the Saudi Royal Family.

Ever since the modern US–Saudi relationship began in 1945, the United
States has been willing to overlook many of the kingdom's more
controversial aspects as long as it maintained oil production and
supported U.S. national security policies. Since World War II, the two
countries have been allied in opposition to Communism, in support of
stable oil prices, stability in the oil fields and oil shipping of the
Persian Gulf, and stability in the economies of Western countries where
Saudis have invested. In particular the two countries were allies
against the Soviets in Afghanistan and in the expulsion of Iraq from
Kuwait in 1991. The two countries have been in disagreement with regard
to the State of Israel, as well as the embargo of the U.S. and its
allies by Saudi Arabia and other Middle East oil exporters during the
1973 oil crisis (which raised oil prices considerably), the 2003 US-led
invasion of Iraq (which Saudi Arabia opposed), aspects of the "War on
Terror", and what many in the U.S. see as the pernicious influence of
Saudi Arabia after the September 11 attacks. In recent years,
particularly the Barack Obama administration, the relationship between
the two countries became strained and witnessed major decline. However,
the relationship was strengthened by President Donald Trump's trip to
Saudi Arabia in May 2017, which was his first overseas trip since
becoming President of the United States.

Despite the strong relationship between the two countries, opinion polls
between the two nations show negative feelings between the American
people and Saudi people in recent years, particularly American feelings
towards the desert kingdom. A poll of Saudis by Zogby International
(2002) and BBC (between October 2005 and January 2006) found 51% of
Saudis had hostile feelings towards the American people in 2002; in
2005/2006, Saudi public opinion was sharply divided with 38% viewing
U.S. influence positively and 38% viewing U.S. influence negatively. As
of 2012, Saudi Arabian students form the 4th largest group of
international students studying in the United States, representing 3.5%
of all foreigners pursuing higher education in the US. A December 2013
poll found 57% of Americans polled had an unfavorable view of Saudi
Arabia and 27% favorable.

In a display of diplomacy and political manoeuvring to re-engage trade,
U.S. President Donald Trump met with the Saudi Government on his visit
to Riyadh in March 2018. Reuters reports a 40 billion dollar commitment
from the Saudi Government (mediated through Black Stone Defense Company
and the Saudi Public Investment Fund) for President Donald Trump's
ambitious infrastructure plan.

In October 2018, the Jamal Khashoggi case put the US into a difficult
situation as Trump and his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, share a strong
personal and official bond with Mohammad bin Salman. During an
interview, Trump vowed to get to the bottom of the case and that there
would be "severe punishment" if the Saudi kingdom is found to be
involved in the disappearance or assassination of the journalist. A
vexed reply came from the Saudi Foreign Ministry saying if Saudi Arabia
"receives any action, it will respond with greater action," citing the
oil-rich kingdom's "influential and vital role in the global economy."
According to Turki Aldakhil, Saudi-owned news Channel, Al-Arabiya's
general manager, this clash between the two countries would have a
direct effect on the world economy. "If US sanctions are imposed on
Saudi Arabia, we will be facing an economic disaster that would rock the
entire world," Aldakhil said.

After weeks of denial, Saudi Arabia accepted that Khashoggi died at the
Saudi consulate in Istanbul during a "fistfight." Adel al-Jubeir
described the journalist's death as a "murder" and a "tremendous
mistake." But he denied the knowledge of whereabouts of the body.
Following the case, the US promised to revoke the visas of Saudi
nationals responsible for Khashoggi's death.

In November 2018, Trump defended Saudi Arabia, despite the country's
involvement in the killing of Khashoggi. Experts in the Middle East
believe that Congress could still put sanctions on some Saudi officials
and the crown prince. However, even without the sanctions imposed, it is
impossible for Mohammad bin Salman to visit Washington or have a direct
relationship with the Trump administration.

However, in November 2018, relations between the United States and Saudi
Arabia re-strengthened when Trump nominated John Abizaid, a retired US
army general who spoke Arabic as US ambassador to the country. Saudi
Arabia also brought a fresh face on board, appointing their first female
ambassador, Princess Reema bint Bandar Al Saud, to help calm relations
in the wake of Khashoggi's death.

On 12 December 2018, United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations
approved a resolution to suspend Yemen conflict-related sales of weapons
to Saudi Arabia and impose sanctions on people obstructing humanitarian
access in Yemen. Senator Lindsey Graham said, “This sends a global
message that just because you’re an ally of the United States, you can’t
kill with impunity. The relationship with Saudi Arabia is not working
for America. It is more of a burden than an asset.”

On 8 April 2019, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced that 16
Saudi nationals involved in Khashoggi’s murder, including Mohammed bin
Salman’s close aid Saud al-Qahtani, have been barred from entering the
US.

Saudi Arabia is listed as the world's 27th largest export economy. Saudi
Arabia has historically proven to be a successful harbor of trade,
exemplified through statistics displaying a positive trade balance of
nearly \$32 billion in 2016.

History
=======

Early history (recognition)
===========================

-   *The relationship between Saudi Arabia and the United States of
    America was economically strengthened in 1933, whereas Standard Oil
    of California was permitted a concession to explore the Saudi
    Arabian lands for oil.*

-   *Saud also hoped to be recognized by the US, which at that time had
    no interest in Saudi Arabia.*

Although King Abdulaziz Al Saud, Ibn Saud as an appellation, the founder
of Saudi Arabia in 1901, had an excellent relationship with the British
who defended Saudi Arabia from the Turks, he eventually developed even
closer ties with the United States. After unifying his country, on
September 28, 1928, Bin Saud set about gaining international recognition
for Saudi Arabia. The United Kingdom was the first country to recognize
Saudi Arabia as an independent state, as the British had provided
protection of Saudi territories from the Turks for many years (Wafa,
2005). Saud also hoped to be recognized by the US, which at that time
had no interest in Saudi Arabia. Initially, his efforts were rebuffed,
but Washington eventually came around, promoted by the fact that Al Saud
had obtained recognition from many nations. In May 1931 the U.S.
officially recognized Saudi Arabia by extending full diplomatic
recognition. At the same time Ibn Saud granted a concession to the U.S.
company, Standard Oil of California, allowing them to explore for oil in
the country's Eastern Province, al-Hasa. The company gave the Saudi
government £35,000 and also paid assorted rental fees and royalty
payments.

In November 1931, a treaty was signed by both nations which included
favored nation status. The relationship was still weak, however, as
America did not have an interest in establishing missions in Saudi
Arabia: at the time, Saudi affairs were handled by the U.S. delegation
in Cairo, Egypt, and did not send a resident ambassador to the country
until 1943.

The relationship between Saudi Arabia and the United States of America
was economically strengthened in 1933, whereas Standard Oil of
California was permitted a concession to explore the Saudi Arabian lands
for oil. The subsidiary of this company, regarded as California Arabian
Standard Oil Company, later deemed Saudi Aramco proved the exploration
to be fruitful in 1938 after finding oil for the first time. The
relationship between the two nations strengthened throughout the next
decade, establishing a full diplomatic relationship through a symbolic
acceptance of an American envoy in Saudi Arabia. President Franklin D.
Roosevelt met with King Abdulaziz on the USS Murphy in 1945, formally
solidifying the friendship between the two nations. Saudi Arabia proved
their willingness to carry out relations by staying neutral in World War
II as well as by allowing the Allied powers to utilize their air space.

Foundation of ARAMCO
====================

-   *Although the imported oil was not very important for the U.S. at
    the time, Washington seemed hungry for the Saudi oil since their
    confidence in finding oil in Saudi Arabia had greatly grown, which
    resulted in stronger relations with Saudi Arabia (Irvine, 1981).*

-   *In 1950 ARAMCO and Saudi Arabia agreed on a 50/50 profit
    distribution of the oil discovered in Saudi Arabia.*

The United States of America and Saudi Arabian trade relationship has
long revolved around two central concepts- security and oil. Throughout
the next two decades, signifying the 50s and 60s, relations between the
two nations grew significantly stronger. In 1950 ARAMCO and Saudi Arabia
agreed on a 50/50 profit distribution of the oil discovered in Saudi
Arabia. In 1951 the Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement was put into
action, which allowed for the US arms trade to Saudi Arabia, along with
a United States military training mission to be centered in the Saudi
Land. The relationship between these two nations, in terms of trade,
continued to prove of high value until 1973 when King Faisal concluded
that Saudi Arabia would take part of the oil embargo, which posed as the
first disagreement between Saudi Arabia and the United States. In 1974
the oil embargo between the United States and Saudi Arabia was
eradicated, which allowed for the United States and Saudi Arabia to sign
military contracts amassing in two billion dollars in the fiscal year of
1975.

After the promises that had been made by American oil explorers that
Saudi Arabia could have a very good chance of finding oil, Al Saud
accepted the American offer of exploration, because he was hoping that
his land could have valuable materials that would support the country's
economy. In May 1933 the California Arabian Standard Oil Company
(CASOC), later called the Arab American Company (ARAMCO), had started
the exploration in the country with large area to explore (Alnabrab,
2008). Although the imported oil was not very important for the U.S. at
the time, Washington seemed hungry for the Saudi oil since their
confidence in finding oil in Saudi Arabia had greatly grown, which
resulted in stronger relations with Saudi Arabia (Irvine, 1981).

CASOC Struck oil near Dhahran, but production over the next several
years remained low—only about 42.5 million barrels between 1941 and
1945; less than 1% of the output in the United States over the same time
period. CASOC was later renamed the Arabian-American Oil Company
(Aramco).

World War II
============

-   *Italy, an Axis power, bombed a CASOC oil installation in Dhahran
    crippling Saudi Arabia's oil production.*

-   *However, as World War II progressed, the United States began to
    believe that Saudi oil was of strategic importance.*

-   *This negligence left Saudi Arabia vulnerable to attack.*

-   *Bin Saud therefore approved the US's request to allow the U.S. air
    force to fly over and construct airfields in Saudi Arabia.*

As the U.S.–Saudi relationship was growing slowly, World War II was
beginning its first phase. The U.S. was deeply involved in World War II,
and as a result, US-Saudi relations were put on the 'back burner'. This
negligence left Saudi Arabia vulnerable to attack. Italy, an Axis power,
bombed a CASOC oil installation in Dhahran crippling Saudi Arabia's oil
production. This attack left Bin Saud scrambling for to find an external
power that would protect the country, fearing further attacks that would
most likely cease the country's oil production and the flow of pilgrims
coming into Makkah to perform Hajj, the base of the Saudi power and
economy at that time (Wafa, 2005).

However, as World War II progressed, the United States began to believe
that Saudi oil was of strategic importance. As a result, in the interest
of national security, the U.S. began to push for greater control over
the CASOC concession. On 16 February 1943, President Franklin D.
Roosevelt declared that "the defense of Saudi Arabia is vital to the
defense of the United States", thereby making possible the extension of
the Lend-Lease program to the kingdom. Later that year, the president
approved the creation of the state-owned Petroleum Reserves Corporation,
with the intent that it purchase all the stock of CASOC and thus gain
control of Saudi oil reserves in the region. However, the plan was met
with opposition and ultimately failed. Roosevelt continued to court the
government, however—on 14 February 1945, he met with King Ibn Saud
aboard the USS Quincy, discussing topics such as the countries' security
relationship and the creation of a Jewish country in the Mandate of
Palestine.

Bin Saud therefore approved the US's request to allow the U.S. air force
to fly over and construct airfields in Saudi Arabia. The oil
installations were rebuilt and protected by the U.S., the pilgrims'
routes were protected (Wafa, 2005), and the U.S. gained a much needed
direct route for military aircraft heading to Iran and the Soviet Union.
The first American consulate was opened in Dhahran in 1944.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.15748031496063in"}\
*President Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon with their host,
King Saud of Saudi Arabia, at the Mayflower Hotel in 1957*

After World War II
==================

-   *In contrast, Saudi government and officials saw the U.S. forces as
    a major component of the Saudi military defense strategy.*

-   *In 1950, Saudi Arabia and Aramco agreed to a 50–50 profit-sharing
    arrangement.*

-   *The security relationship between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. was
    therefore greatly strengthened at the start of the 'cold war'.*

In 1945, after World War II, Saudi citizens began to feel uncomfortable
with U.S. forces still operating in Dhahran. In contrast, Saudi
government and officials saw the U.S. forces as a major component of the
Saudi military defense strategy. As a result, Bin Saud balanced the two
conflicts by increasing the demands on U.S. forces in Dhahran when the
region was highly threatened and lowering it when the danger declined
(Alnabrab, 1994). At this time, due to the start of the Cold War, the
U.S. was greatly concerned about Soviet communism and devised a strategy
of 'containing' the spread of communism within Arabian Peninsula,
putting Saudi security at the top of Washington's list of priorities.
Harry S. Truman's administration also promised Bin Saud that he would
protect Saudi Arabia from Soviet influence. Therefore, the U.S.
increased its presence in the region to protect its interest and its
allies. The security relationship between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. was
therefore greatly strengthened at the start of the 'cold war'.

In 1950, Saudi Arabia and Aramco agreed to a 50–50 profit-sharing
arrangement.

![](media/image3.jpg){width="3.8279997812773403in" height="5.5in"}\
*King Saud and John Kennedy meet at the king's mansion in Palm Beach,
Florida in 1962*

King Saud comes to power (1953)
===============================

-   *President Dwight D. Eisenhower's new anti-Soviet alliance combined
    most of "the kingdom's regional rivals and foes", which heightened
    Saudi suspicions.*

-   *Eisenhower opposed the plan because of anti-Soviet purposes, but
    King Saud had admired the act and decided to start cooperating with
    the U.S. As a result, Egyptian power greatly declined while US-Saudi
    relations were simultaneously improving.*

-   *Furthermore, Saud dismissed the U.S. forces and replaced them by
    Egyptian forces.*

In the late 1950s, King Saud, the eldest son of King Abdulaziz, came to
power after his father's death. During Saud's time the U.S.–Saudi
relations had faced many obstacles concerning the anti-communism
strategy. President Dwight D. Eisenhower's new anti-Soviet alliance
combined most of "the kingdom's regional rivals and foes", which
heightened Saudi suspicions. For this reason, in October 1955, Saud had
joined the pro-Soviet strategy with Egyptian president Gamal Abdel
Nasser. Furthermore, Saud dismissed the U.S. forces and replaced them by
Egyptian forces. Thus, this act had sparked and innovated a new and a
large conflict in the relationship. But in 1956, during the Suez crisis,
Saud began to cooperate with the U.S. again after Eisenhower's
opposition of the Israeli, British, and French plan to seize the canal.
Eisenhower opposed the plan because of anti-Soviet purposes, but King
Saud had admired the act and decided to start cooperating with the U.S.
As a result, Egyptian power greatly declined while US-Saudi relations
were simultaneously improving.

Cold War and Soviet containment
===============================

-   *In the Gulf region, this meant relying on Saudi Arabia and Iran as
    "twin pillars" of regional security.*

-   *In 1962, however, Egypt attacked Saudi Arabia from bases in Yemen
    during the 1962 Yemeni revolution because of Saudi Arabia's
    Anti-revolution propaganda, which made Saud seek the U.S. support.*

-   *Whereas in 1970 the U.S. provided less than \$16 million to Saudi
    Arabia in military aid, that number increased to \$312 million
    by 1972.*

In 1957, Saud decided to renew the U.S. base in Dhahran. In less than a
year, after the Egyptian–Syrian unification in 1958, Egypt's pro-Soviet
strategy had returned to power. Saud had once again joined their
alliance, which declined the US-Saudi relationship to a fairly low point
especially after he announced in 1961 that he changed his mind on
renewing the U.S. base. In 1962, however, Egypt attacked Saudi Arabia
from bases in Yemen during the 1962 Yemeni revolution because of Saudi
Arabia's Anti-revolution propaganda, which made Saud seek the U.S.
support. President John F. Kennedy immediately responded to Saud's
request by sending U.S. warplanes in July 1963 to the war zone to stop
the attack which was putting U.S. interests at risk. At the end of the
war, shortly before Prince Faisal became king, the relationship rebuilt
itself to become healthy again.

As the United Kingdom withdrew from the Gulf region in the late 1960s
and early 1970s, the U.S. was reluctant to take on new security
commitments. Instead, the Nixon administration sought to rely on local
allies to "police" American interests (see Nixon Doctrine). In the Gulf
region, this meant relying on Saudi Arabia and Iran as "twin pillars" of
regional security. Whereas in 1970 the U.S. provided less than \$16
million to Saudi Arabia in military aid, that number increased to \$312
million by 1972. As part of the "twin pillars" strategy, the U.S. also
attempted to improve relations between the Saudis and the Iranians, such
as by persuading Iran to remove its territorial claim to Bahrain.

![](media/image4.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.966346237970254in"}\
*King Fahd with U.S. President Ronald Reagan and Ivana and Donald Trump
in 1985. The U.S. and Saudi Arabia supplied money and arms to the
anti-Soviet fighters in Afghanistan.*

Oil embargo and energy crises
=============================

-   *The US, on the other hand, was not sure about the outcome of such
    unplanned change in the Saudi monarchy.*

-   *Furthermore, the U.S. and Saudi Arabia were both supporting
    anti-communist groups in Afghanistan and struggling countries, one
    of those groups later became known as the Al-Qaida terrorist
    organization.*

-   *In January 1979, the U.S. sent F-15 fighters to Saudi Arabia for
    further protection from communism.*

In November 1964, Faisal became the new king after the conflicts he had
with his brother Saud, the erstwhile king. The US, on the other hand,
was not sure about the outcome of such unplanned change in the Saudi
monarchy. Faisal, however, continued the cooperation with the US until
October 20, 1973. Then came the low point of the relationship before
9/11, as Faisal decided to contribute in an oil embargo against the US
and Europe in favor of the Arab position during the Yom Kippur War. That
caused an energy crisis in the US.

"America's complete Israel support against the Arabs makes it extremely
difficult for us to continue to supply the United States with oil, or
even remain friends with the United States," said Faisal in an interview
with international media.

Despite the tensions caused by the oil embargo, the U.S. wished to
resume relations with the Saudis. Indeed, the great oil wealth
accumulated as a result of price increases allowed the Saudis to
purchase large sums of American military technology. The embargo was
lifted in March 1974 after the U.S. pressured Israel into negotiating
with Syria over the Golan Heights. Three months later, "Washington and
Riyadh signed a wide-ranging agreement on expanded economic and military
cooperation." In the 1975 fiscal year, the two countries signed \$2
billion worth of military contracts, including an agreement to send
Saudi Arabia 60 fighter jets. The Saudis also argued (partially on
behalf of American desires) to keep OPEC price increases in the
mid-1970s lower than Iraq and Iran initially wanted. As part of the
"twin pillars" strategy, the U.S. also attempted to improve relations
between the Saudis and the Iranians, such as by persuading Iran to
remove its territorial claim to Bahrain.

The Saudis' increase of oil production to stabilize the oil price and
the support of anti-communism have all contributed to closer relations
with the U.S. In January 1979, the U.S. sent F-15 fighters to Saudi
Arabia for further protection from communism. Furthermore, the U.S. and
Saudi Arabia were both supporting anti-communist groups in Afghanistan
and struggling countries, one of those groups later became known as the
Al-Qaida terrorist organization.

Government purchases
====================

-   *Saudi Arabia transferred \$100 billion to the United States for
    administration, construction, weapons, and in the 1970s and 1980s
    higher education scholarships to the U.S. During that era the U.S.
    built and administrated numerous military academies, navy ports, and
    Air Force military airbases.*

-   *The U.S. and U.S. companies were actively engaged and paid
    handsomely for preparing and administrating the rebuilding of Saudi
    Arabia.*

After the Cold War the U.S.–Saudi relations were improving. The U.S. and
U.S. companies were actively engaged and paid handsomely for preparing
and administrating the rebuilding of Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia
transferred \$100 billion to the United States for administration,
construction, weapons, and in the 1970s and 1980s higher education
scholarships to the U.S. During that era the U.S. built and
administrated numerous military academies, navy ports, and Air Force
military airbases. Many of these military facilities were influenced by
the U.S., with the needs of cold war aircraft and deployment strategies
in mind. Also the Saudis purchased a great deal of weapons that varied
from F-15 war planes to M1 Abrams main battle tanks that later proved
useful during the Gulf War. The U.S. pursued a policy of building up and
training the Saudi military as a counterweight to Shiite extremism and
revolution following the revolution in Iran. The U.S. provided top of
the line equipment and training, and consulted the Saudi government
frequently, acknowledging them as the most important Islamic leader in
that part of the world, and a key player in the U.S. security strategy.

The Gulf War
============

-   *Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 led to the Gulf War,
    during which the security relationship between the US and Saudi
    Arabia was greatly strengthened.*

-   *Relations between the two nations solidified even further past the
    point of the oil embargo, whereas the United States of America sent
    nearly 500,000 soldiers to Saudi Arabia in attempt to aid in
    protection against Iraq.*

-   *The U.S. was concerned about the safety of Saudi Arabia against
    Saddam's intention to invade and control the oil reserves in the
    region.*

Relations between the two nations solidified even further past the point
of the oil embargo, whereas the United States of America sent nearly
500,000 soldiers to Saudi Arabia in attempt to aid in protection against
Iraq. Following Operation Desert Shield, which was a response by
President George H. W. Bush to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990,
America kept 5,000 troops in Saudi Arabia in order to maintain their
protection and our trade relations.

Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in August 1990 led to the Gulf War, during
which the security relationship between the US and Saudi Arabia was
greatly strengthened. Concurrently with the US invasion, King Fahd
declared war against Iraq. The U.S. was concerned about the safety of
Saudi Arabia against Saddam's intention to invade and control the oil
reserves in the region. As a result, after King Fahd's approval,
President Bush deployed a significant amount of American military forces
(up to 543,000 ground troops by the end of the operation) to protect
Saudi Arabia from a possible Iraqi invasion; this operation was called
Desert Shield. Furthermore, the U.S. sent additional troops in operation
Desert Storm with nearly 100,000 Saudi troops sent by Fahad to form a
US-Saudi army alliance, along with troops from other allied countries,
to attack Iraqi troops in Kuwait and to stop further invasion. During
Operation Desert Storm Iraqi troops were defeated within four days,
causing the Iraqis to retreat back to Iraq.

![](media/image5.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.004854549431321in"}\
*U.S. President George W. Bush and Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia
in Crawford, Texas, 25 April 2002*

Operation Southern Watch
========================

-   *The continued presence of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia was one of
    the stated motivations behind the September 11 attacks, as well as
    the Khobar Towers bombing.*

-   *In 2003, the U.S. withdrew most of its troops from Saudi Arabia,
    though one unit still remains.*

-   *Since the Gulf War, the U.S. had a continued presence of 5,000
    troops stationed in Saudi Arabia – a figure that rose to 10,000
    during the 2003 conflict in Iraq.*

Since the Gulf War, the U.S. had a continued presence of 5,000 troops
stationed in Saudi Arabia – a figure that rose to 10,000 during the 2003
conflict in Iraq. Operation Southern Watch enforced the no-fly zones
over southern Iraq set up after 1991, and the country's oil exports
through the shipping lanes of the Persian Gulf are protected by the US
Fifth Fleet, based in Bahrain.

The continued presence of U.S. troops in Saudi Arabia was one of the
stated motivations behind the September 11 attacks, as well as the
Khobar Towers bombing. In 2003, the U.S. withdrew most of its troops
from Saudi Arabia, though one unit still remains.

![](media/image6.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.629629265091864in"}\
*Former Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Sultan bin Abdul-Aziz Al Saud in the
White House.*

2010 U.S. arms sale to Saudi Arabia
===================================

-   *The package represents a considerable improvement in the offensive
    capability of the Saudi armed forces.*

-   *On October 20, 2010, U.S. State Department notified Congress of its
    intention to make the biggest arms sale in American history – an
    estimated \$60.5 billion purchase by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.*

On October 20, 2010, U.S. State Department notified Congress of its
intention to make the biggest arms sale in American history – an
estimated \$60.5 billion purchase by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The
package represents a considerable improvement in the offensive
capability of the Saudi armed forces.

The U.S. was keen to point out that the arms transfer would increase
"interoperability" with U.S. forces. In the 1990–1991 Gulf War, having
U.S.-trained Saudi forces, along with military installations built to
U.S. specifications, allowed the American armed forces to deploy in a
comfortable and familiar battle environment. This new deal would
increase these capabilities, as an advanced American military
infrastructure is about to be built.

Foreign policy
==============

-   *Russia and Saudi concluded a joint venture between Saudi ARAMCO and
    LUKOIL to develop new Saudi gas fields.*

Upon becoming regent in 2005, King Abdullah's first foreign trip was to
China. In 2012 A Saudi-Chinese agreement to cooperate in the use of
atomic energy for peaceful purposes was signed. Abdullah also welcomed
Russian president Vladimir Putin to Riyadh in 2007, awarding him the
kingdom's highest honor, the King Abdul Aziz Medal. Russia and Saudi
concluded a joint venture between Saudi ARAMCO and LUKOIL to develop new
Saudi gas fields.

![](media/image7.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6601596675415573in"}\
*Prince Mohammad bin Salman with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry, 13
June 2016*

Rift
====

-   *Saudi Arabia was cautiously supportive of a Western-negotiated
    interim agreement with Iran over its nuclear program.*

-   *In October 2013, Saudi intelligence chief Prince Bandar bin Sultan
    suggested a distancing of Saudi Arabia–United States relations as a
    result of differences between the two countries over the Syrian
    civil war and diplomatic overtures between Iran and the Obama
    administration.*

Alwaleed bin Talal warned several Saudi ministers in May 2013 that shale
gas production in the U.S. would eventually pose a threat to the
kingdom's oil-dependent economy. Despite this, the two countries still
maintained a positive relationship.

In October 2013, Saudi intelligence chief Prince Bandar bin Sultan
suggested a distancing of Saudi Arabia–United States relations as a
result of differences between the two countries over the Syrian civil
war and diplomatic overtures between Iran and the Obama administration.
The Saudis rejected a rotating seat on the UN Security Council that
month (despite previously campaigning for such a seat), in protest of
American policy over those issues.

Saudi Arabia was cautiously supportive of a Western-negotiated interim
agreement with Iran over its nuclear program. President Obama called
King Abdullah to brief him about the agreement, and the White House said
the leaders agreed to "consult regularly" about the U.S.'s negotiations
with Iran.

Controversies
=============

First conflict
==============

-   *Moreover, in March 1938, CASCO made a big oil discovery in Saudi
    Arabia booming the oil industry in the country and coincidentally
    the U.S. became more interested in Saudi oil.*

-   *As a result, on February 4, 1940, as the World War II was
    approaching, the U.S. had established a diplomatic presence in Saudi
    Arabia to have closer relations with the Saudis and to protect it
    from enemy hand; Bert Fish, former ambassador in Egypt was elected
    as the U.S. ambassador in Jeddah.*

-   *In other words, the U.S. oil interest in Saudi Arabia could be held
    hostage depending on the circumstances of the conflict.*

While the U.S.–Saudi relationship was growing, their first conflict
began when the disorder broke between the Jews and Arabs in April 1936
in the British-administrated Palestine mandate. The U.S. favored the
establishment of an independent Israeli state, but Saudi Arabia on the
other hand, the leading nation in the Islamic and Arab world were
supporting the Arab position which sparked up their first conflict. In
other words, the U.S. oil interest in Saudi Arabia could be held hostage
depending on the circumstances of the conflict. U.S. president Franklin
D. Roosevelt sent the king a letter indicating that it is true that the
U.S. supports the establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine, but it
is not in any way responsible for the establishment (Alnabrab, 2008).
Bin Saud was convinced by the message that the U.S.–Saudi relations had
begun to run smooth again. Moreover, in March 1938, CASCO made a big oil
discovery in Saudi Arabia booming the oil industry in the country and
coincidentally the U.S. became more interested in Saudi oil. As a
result, on February 4, 1940, as the World War II was approaching, the
U.S. had established a diplomatic presence in Saudi Arabia to have
closer relations with the Saudis and to protect it from enemy hand; Bert
Fish, former ambassador in Egypt was elected as the U.S. ambassador in
Jeddah.

![](media/image8.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.115517279090113in"}\
*Visa page from Saeed al-Ghamdi's Kingdom of Saudi Arabia passport
recovered from the United Airlines Flight 93 crash site*

September 11 attacks
====================

-   *Although some analysts have speculated that Osama bin Laden, who in
    1994 had his Saudi nationality revoked and expelled from Saudi
    Arabia, had chosen 15 Saudi hijackers on purpose to break up the
    U.S.–Saudi relations, as the U.S. was still suspicious of Saudi
    Arabia (PBS Frontline, 2005).*

-   *In the backlash against Saudi Arabia and Wahhabism, the Saudi
    government was portrayed in the media, Senate hearings, and
    elsewhere as*

-   *It is time for the United States and Saudi Arabia to look at their
    separate interests.*

On September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on New York City and
Washington, D.C. and in a field near Shanksville, Pennsylvania by four
hijacked airplanes killed 2,977 victims and cost an estimated \$150
billion in property and infrastructure damage and economic impact,
exceeding the death toll and damage caused by the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbor 60 years earlier. 15 of the 19 hijackers in the attacks
came from Saudi Arabia, as did the leader of the hijackers'
organization, (Osama bin Laden). In the U.S., there followed
considerable negative publicity for, and scrutiny of, Saudi Arabia and
its teaching of Islam, and a reassessing of the "oil-for-security"
alliance with the Al Saud. A 2002 Council on Foreign Relations Terrorist
Financing Task Force report found that: "For years, individuals and
charities based in Saudi Arabia have been the most important source of
funds for al-Qaeda. And for years, Saudi officials have turned a blind
eye to this problem."

In the backlash against Saudi Arabia and Wahhabism, the Saudi government
was portrayed in the media, Senate hearings, and elsewhere as

There was even a proposal at the Defense Policy Board, (an arm of
Department of Defense) to consider \`taking Saudi out of Arabia\` by
forcibly seizing control of the oil fields, giving the Hijaz back to the
Hashemites, and delegating control of Medina and Mecca to a
multinational committee of moderate, non-Wahhabi Muslims.

In Saudi Arabia itself, anti-American sentiment was described as
"intense" and "at an all-time high".

A survey taken by the Saudi intelligence service of "educated Saudis
between the ages of 25 and 41" taken shortly after the 9/11 attacks
"concluded that 95 percent" of those surveyed supported Bin Laden's
cause. (Support for Bin Laden reportedly waned by 2006 and by then, the
Saudi population become considerably more pro-American, after Al-Qaeda
linked groups staged attacks inside Saudi Arabia.) The proposal at the
Defense Policy Board to \`take Saudi out of Arabia\` was spread as the
secret US plan for the kingdom.

In October 2001, The Wall Street Journal reported that Crown Prince
Abdullah sent a critical letter to U.S. President George W. Bush on
August 29: "A time comes when peoples and nations part. We are at a
crossroads. It is time for the United States and Saudi Arabia to look at
their separate interests. Those governments that don't feel the pulse of
their people and respond to it will suffer the fate of the Shah of
Iran."

For over a year after 9/11 Saudi Minister of the Interior (a powerful
post whose jurisdiction included domestic intelligence gathering),
Prince Nayef bin Abdul-Aziz Al Saud, insisted that the Saudi hijackers
were dupes in a Zionist plot. In December 2002, a Saudi government
spokesman declared that his country was the victim of unwarranted
American intolerance bordering on hate.

In 2003, several terror attacks targeted U.S. compounds, the Saudi
ministry of interior, and several other places occurred inside Saudi
Arabia. As a result of these attacks, the U.S. decided to redevelop
Saudi law enforcement agencies by providing them with anti-terrorism
education, the latest technologies, and by giving them a chance to
interact with U.S. law enforcement agencies to gain efficient knowledge
and power needed to handle terrorist cases and to enforce anti-terrorist
laws.

Although some analysts have speculated that Osama bin Laden, who in 1994
had his Saudi nationality revoked and expelled from Saudi Arabia, had
chosen 15 Saudi hijackers on purpose to break up the U.S.–Saudi
relations, as the U.S. was still suspicious of Saudi Arabia (PBS
Frontline, 2005). The Saudi's decided to cooperate with the U.S. on the
war on terror. "Terrorism does not belong to any culture, or religion,
or political system", said King Abdullah as the opening address of the
Counter-terrorism International Conference (CTIC) held in Riyadh in
2005. The cooperation grew broader covering financial, educational,
technological aspects both in Saudi Arabia and Muslim-like countries to
prevent pro-Al-Qaeda terrorists' activities and ideologies. "It is a
high time for the Ulma (Muslim Scholars), and all thinkers,
intellectuals, and academics, to shoulder their responsibilities towards
the enlightenment of the people, especially the young people, and
protect them from deviant ideas" said Sheikh Saleh bin Abdulaziz
Alsheikh, Minister of Islamic Affairs, in the CTIC.\[citation needed\]

Almost all members of the CTIC agreed that Al-Qaeda target less educated
Muslims by convincing them that they are warriors of God, but they
really convince them to only accomplish their political goals. Three
years after the Saudi Serious and active role on anti-terrorist,
Al-Qaeda began launching multiple attacks targeting Saudi government
buildings and U.S. compounds in Saudi grounds (Alshihry, 2003). Their
attacks exhibit their revenge against Saudi Arabia's cooperation with
the U.S. trying to stop further US–Saudi anti-terrorist movements and
trying to corrode the US-Saudi relationship and to annihilate
it.\[citation needed\]

After these changes, the Saudi government was more equipped in
preventing terrorist activities. They caught a large number of Saudi
terrorists and terrorists from other countries (some of them American)
that had connections with al-Qaeda in one way or another (U.S.
Department of State 2007). Some of these criminals held high rank in
terrorist society, which helped diffuse many terrorist cells (Alahmary,
2004). In a matter of months, Saudi law enforcement officials were
successfully able to stop and prevent terrorist activities. Also, they
were successful in finding the source of terrorist financing.\[citation
needed\]

Child abduction
===============

-   *The international abduction of American children to Saudi Arabia
    provoked sustained criticism and resulted in a Congressional hearing
    in 2002 where parents of children held in Saudi Arabia gave
    impassioned testimony related to the abduction of their children.*

-   *Washington-based Insight ran a series of articles on international
    abduction during the same period highlighting Saudi Arabia a number
    of times.*

The international abduction of American children to Saudi Arabia
provoked sustained criticism and resulted in a Congressional hearing in
2002 where parents of children held in Saudi Arabia gave impassioned
testimony related to the abduction of their children. Washington-based
Insight ran a series of articles on international abduction during the
same period highlighting Saudi Arabia a number of times.

Allegations of funding terrorism
================================

-   *In October 2015, Saudi Arabia delivered 500 U.S.-made TOW anti-tank
    missiles missiles to anti-Assad rebels.*

-   *According to a 2009 U.S. State Department communication by Hillary
    Clinton, United States Secretary of State, (disclosed as part of the
    Wikileaks U.S. 'cables leaks' controversy in 2010) "donors in Saudi
    Arabia constitute the most significant source of funding to Sunni
    terrorist groups worldwide".*

-   *Saudi Arabia was involved in the CIA-led Timber Sycamore covert
    operation to train and arm Syrian rebels.*

According to a 2009 U.S. State Department communication by Hillary
Clinton, United States Secretary of State, (disclosed as part of the
Wikileaks U.S. 'cables leaks' controversy in 2010) "donors in Saudi
Arabia constitute the most significant source of funding to Sunni
terrorist groups worldwide". Part of this funding arises through the
zakat (an act of charity dictated by Islam) paid by all Saudis to
charities, and amounting to at least 2.5% of their income. Although many
charities are genuine, others allegedly serve as fronts for money
laundering and terrorist financing operations. While many Saudis
contribute to those charities in good faith believing their money goes
toward good causes, it has been alleged that others know full well the
terrorist purposes to which their money will be applied.

In September 2016, the Congress passed the Justice Against Sponsors of
Terrorism Act that would allow relatives of victims of the September 11
attacks to sue Saudi Arabia for its government's alleged role in the
attacks.

Saudi Arabia was involved in the CIA-led Timber Sycamore covert
operation to train and arm Syrian rebels. Some American officials
worried that Syrian rebels being supported had ties to al-Qaeda. In
October 2015, Saudi Arabia delivered 500 U.S.-made TOW anti-tank
missiles missiles to anti-Assad rebels. Reports indicate that some TOW
missiles have ended up in the hands of al-Qaeda in Syria and Islamic
State.

Human rights controversy
========================

-   *US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo urged Saudi Arabia to "support a
    thorough investigation" regarding the disappearance and "to be
    transparent about the results."*

-   *In October 2018, serious allegations were put on Saudi for
    murdering a Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi inside the
    Saudi consulate in Istanbul.*

The approval of the 2017 arms deal was opposed by various lawmakers,
including GOP Senators Mike Lee, Rand Paul, Todd Young and Dean Heller
along with most Democrat Senators who voted to advance the measure in
order to block the sale, citing the human rights violations by Saudi
Arabia in the Yemeni Civil War. Among the senators who voted against
moving the measure to block the sale were Democratic Senators Joe
Donnelly, Claire McCaskill, Bill Nelson, Joe Manchin and Mark Warner
along with top Republicans, including Majority Leader Mitch McConnell,
Bob Corker and John McCain.

Tulsi Gabbard, a Democratic Representative from Hawaii, criticized the
move, saying that Saudi Arabia is "a country with a devastating record
of human rights violations at home and abroad, and a long history of
providing support to terrorist organizations that threaten the American
people". Rand Paul introduced a bill to try to block the plan calling it
a "travesty".

U.S. Senator Chris Murphy accused the United States of complicity in
Yemen's humanitarian crisis, saying: "Thousands and thousands inside
Yemen today are dying. ... This horror is caused in part by our decision
to facilitate a bombing campaign that is murdering children and to
endorse a Saudi strategy inside Yemen that is deliberately using disease
and starvation and the withdrawal of humanitarian support as a tactic."

In October 2018, serious allegations were put on Saudi for murdering a
Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi inside the Saudi consulate in
Istanbul. US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo urged Saudi Arabia to
"support a thorough investigation" regarding the disappearance and "to
be transparent about the results." Trump said, "We cannot let this
happen to reporters, to anybody. We're demanding everything. We want to
see what's going on there."

Lindsey Graham, a senior Republican senator's reaction was stern, as he
said "there would be hell to pay" if Saudi is involved in the murder of
Khashoggi. He further added, "If they're this brazen it shows contempt.
Contempt for everything we stand for, contempt for the relationship."

Ambassador at Large Sam Brownback condemned the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
for its religious freedom abuses, on the release of 2018 Report on
International Religious Freedom by the State Department. Brownback
called Saudi as "one of the worst actors in the world on religious
persecution" and hoped to see “actions take place in a positive
direction”. The report details discrimination against and maltreatment
of Shiite Muslims in Saudi Arabia that includes the mass execution of 34
individuals in April 2019, out of which a majority were Shiite Muslims.

2016 U.S. presidential election
===============================

-   *In April 2017, U.S. President Donald J. Trump attempted to repair
    the United States' relationship with Saudi Arabia by having the US
    Defense Secretary visit Saudi Arabia.*

-   *Trump has stated that he aims to help and assist Saudi Arabia in
    terms of military protection in order to receive beneficial economic
    compensation for the United States in return.*

In August 2016, Donald Trump Jr. had a meeting with an envoy
representing Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince and de facto ruler Mohammad bin
Salman, and Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi.
The envoy offered help to the Trump presidential campaign. The meeting
included Lebanese-American lobbyist George Nader, Joel Zamel, an Israeli
specialist in social media manipulation, and Blackwater founder Erik
Prince.

In April 2017, U.S. President Donald J. Trump attempted to repair the
United States' relationship with Saudi Arabia by having the US Defense
Secretary visit Saudi Arabia. Trump has stated that he aims to help and
assist Saudi Arabia in terms of military protection in order to receive
beneficial economic compensation for the United States in return.

![](media/image9.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.663409886264217in"}\
*U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry with King Salman of Saudi Arabia in
Riyadh, 25 August 2016*

![](media/image10.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.673196631671041in"}\
*U.S. Navy has actively participated in the Saudi-led naval blockade of
Yemen.*

Post-9/11 relationship
======================

-   *Saudi Arabia and the U.S. are strategic allies, and since President
    Obama took office in 2009, the U.S. has sold \$110 billion in arms
    to Saudi Arabia.*

-   *He asked the President to remove restrictions on U.S. military
    support for Saudi Arabia.*

-   *Many experts believe the United States of America and Saudi Arabia
    are almost 'perfect' for trade due to oil being an essential
    commodity to the American people and the overall economy of the
    United States.*

Saudi Arabia engaged the Washington, D.C., lobbying firm of Patton Boggs
as registered foreign agents in the wake of the public relations
disaster when knowledge of the identities of suspected hijackers became
known. They also hired the PR and lobbying firm Qorvis for \$14 million
a year. Qorvis engaged in a PR frenzy that publicized the "9/11
Commission finding that there was 'no evidence that the Saudi government
as an institution or senior Saudi officials individually funded \[Al
Qaeda\]'—while omitting the report's conclusion that 'Saudi Arabia has
been a problematic ally in combating Islamic extremism.'"

According to at least one journalist (John R. Bradley), the ruling Saudi
family was caught between depending for military defense on the United
States, while also depending for domestic support on the Wahhabi
religious establishment, which as a matter of religious doctrine
"ultimately seeks the West's destruction", including that of its ruler's
purported ally—the US. During the Iraq War, Saudi Foreign Minister
Prince Saud Al-Faisal, criticized the U.S.-led invasion as a "colonial
adventure" aimed only at gaining control of Iraq's natural resources.
But at the same time, Bradley writes, the Saudi government secretly
allowed the US military to "essentially" manage its air campaign and
launch special operations against Iraq from inside Saudi borders, using
"at least three" Saudi air bases.

The two nations cooperate and share information about al-Qaeda (Alsheikh
2006) and leaders from both countries continue to meet to discuss their
mutual interests and bilateral relations.

Saudi Arabia and the U.S. are strategic allies, and since President
Obama took office in 2009, the U.S. has sold \$110 billion in arms to
Saudi Arabia. The National Security Agency (NSA) in 2013 began
cooperating with the Saudi Ministry of Interior in an effort to help
ensure "regime continuity". An April 2013 top secret memo shows the
agency's program of providing "direct analytic and technical support" to
the Saudis on "internal security" matters. The CIA had already been
gathering intelligence for the regime long before.

In January 2015, after the death of King Abdullah, the White House and
President Obama praised him as a leader and mentioned "the importance of
the U.S.-Saudi relationship as a force for stability and security in the
Middle East and beyond."

In March 2015, President Barack Obama declared that he had authorized
U.S. forces to provide logistical and intelligence support to the Saudis
in their military intervention in Yemen, establishing a "Joint Planning
Cell" with Saudi Arabia. U.S. government lawyers have considered whether
the United States is legally a "co-belligerent" in the conflict. Such a
finding would oblige the U.S. to investigate allegations of war crimes
by the Saudi coalition, and U.S. military personnel could be subject to
prosecution.

American journalist Glenn Greenwald wrote in October 2016: "From the
start of the hideous Saudi bombing campaign against Yemen 18 months ago,
two countries have played active, vital roles in enabling the carnage:
the U.S. and U.K. The atrocities committed by the Saudis would have been
impossible without their steadfast, aggressive support."

In September 2016, Senators Rand Paul and Chris Murphy worked to prevent
the proposed sale of \$1.15 billion in arms from the U.S. to Saudi
Arabia. The U.S. Senate voted 71 to 27 against the Murphy–Paul
resolution to block the U.S.–Saudi arms deal.

While the trade based relationship between the United States of America
and Saudi Arabia is one that is vastly affected by political
disagreements and positions, the trade has yet to cease since its
conception. Relations between the two nations have never commit to a
complete halt throughout history due to the economic advantages both
nations gain from one another. Statistically, the trade balance, using
2016 as a benchmark year, has declined to a deficit of 2.5 billion
dollars over the 2017 year, popular opinion is that this exemplifies
strong future relations between the two nations through the political
and militaristic common grounds the United States has been developing
with Saudi Arabia. Many experts believe the United States of America and
Saudi Arabia are almost 'perfect' for trade due to oil being an
essential commodity to the American people and the overall economy of
the United States.

In January 2017, U.S. Secretary of Defense James Mattis "reaffirmed the
importance of the U.S.-Saudi Arabia strategic relationship". Mattis has
voiced support for a Saudi Arabian-led military campaign against Yemen's
Shiite rebels. He asked the President to remove restrictions on U.S.
military support for Saudi Arabia. On 10 February 2017, CIA director
Mike Pompeo awarded the Saudi Crown Prince Muhammad bin Nayef with the
CIA's "George Tenet" Medal.

Trade relations
===============

Energy and oil
==============

-   *Saudi Arabia has consistently been in need of weapons,
    reinforcement, and arms due to the consistent rising tensions
    throughout the Middle East during the late 20th century and early
    21st century.*

-   *Saudi Arabia has been an enticing trade partner with the United
    States from the early 20th century.*

-   *Post 2016, the United States of America has continued to trade with
    Saudi Arabia mainly for their oil related goods.*

Saudi Arabia has been an enticing trade partner with the United States
from the early 20th century. The biggest commodity traded between the
two nations is oil. The strength of the relationship is notoriously
attributed to the United States' demand on oil throughout the post
modern era, approximately 10,000 barrels of petroleum are imported daily
to United States since 2012 ("U.S. Total Crude Oil and Products
Imports"). Saudi Arabia has consistently been in need of weapons,
reinforcement, and arms due to the consistent rising tensions throughout
the Middle East during the late 20th century and early 21st century.
Post 2016, the United States of America has continued to trade with
Saudi Arabia mainly for their oil related goods. The top exports of
Saudi Arabia are Crude Petroleum (\$96.1B), Refined Petroleum (\$13B),
Ethylene Polymers(\$10.1B), Propylene Polymers (\$4.93B) and Ethers
(\$3.6B), using the 1992 revision of the HS (Harmonized System)
classification. Its top imports are Cars (\$11.8B), Planes, Helicopters,
and/or Spacecraft (\$3.48B), Packaged Medicaments (\$3.34B),
Broadcasting Equipment (\$3.27B) and Aircraft Parts (\$2.18B)".

Recent years
============

-   *In terms of statistics, the United States - Saudi Arabian trade
    declined approximately nine percent in U.S. exports in 2017 compared
    to the year prior; however, 2017 exemplified great reparation of the
    relationship through a 57% increase of exports from 2007.*

-   *In the year 2017, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was the United States
    of America's 20th ranked export market across the globe and ranked
    21st in import markets.*

In the year 2017, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was the United States of
America's 20th ranked export market across the globe and ranked 21st in
import markets. The most prominent goods set forth as exports to Saudi
Arabia in the designated year (2017) were "aircraft (\$3.6 billion),
vehicles (\$2.6 billion), machinery (\$2.2 billion), electrical
machinery (\$1.6 billion), and arms and ammunition (\$1.4 billion). In
terms of statistics, the United States - Saudi Arabian trade declined
approximately nine percent in U.S. exports in 2017 compared to the year
prior; however, 2017 exemplified great reparation of the relationship
through a 57% increase of exports from 2007. Imports between the two
nations increased approximately 11 percent from 2017 to 2018, which is
an overall decline of 47% since the year fiscal 2007. The entities that
the United States of America seeks to import from Saudi Arabia has
hardly changed over the years: "The top import categories (2-digit HS)
in 2017 were: mineral fuels (\$18 billion), organic chemicals (\$303
million), special other (returns) (\$247 million), aluminum (\$164
million), and fertilizers (\$148 million)".

Controversies
=============

-   *The most damaging occurrence to ever affect the trade relationship
    between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. occurred on September 11, 2001 due
    to Saudi Arabia's believed involvement in the 9/11 attacks that
    occurred in multiple cities throughout the United States.*

-   *Saudi Arabia and the United States of America have never fully
    eliminated their trading agreements however the relationship has
    experience consistent disagreements through its history from its
    conception.*

Saudi Arabia and the United States of America have never fully
eliminated their trading agreements however the relationship has
experience consistent disagreements through its history from its
conception. In the height of the Syrian Civil War, which started in
March 2011, Saudi Arabia expressed disapproval of the United States lack
of action in eradicating Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. The United
States' has consistently expressed disapproval of the treatment of Saudi
Arabian women within the confines of the Kingdom. The famous criticisms
of the early 21st century behind the relationship between the two
countries is due to the mix of the disregard of the aforementioned
issues and the public knowledge that trade between Saudi Arabia and the
United States has trended upwards in the post 9/11 world. In recent
years, the imports and exports of U.S- Saudi trades have not shown a
percentage increase each year, where it topped out around 2012 and has
been in slight fluctuation since, but the overall trend of trade has
shown a positive slope. In 2001: U.S. exports were at \$5,957.60 and
imports were at \$13,272.20 (in millions of U.S. dollars) whereas,
controversially as it is believed, in 2012 the United States witnessed
\$17,961.20 in exports and \$55,667.00 in imports.

The most damaging occurrence to ever affect the trade relationship
between Saudi Arabia and the U.S. occurred on September 11, 2001 due to
Saudi Arabia's believed involvement in the 9/11 attacks that occurred in
multiple cities throughout the United States. Tensions also rose between
the two nations throughout Barack Obama's Presidency due to the United
States agreement in the Iran, when the U.S. removed oil sanctions on
Iran and allowed them to sell their oil to the U.S. The relationship was
also hindered by the oil market crash of 2014, where the US opened
shares of Shale Oil Production which caused for the Saudi Arabian
exports of oil to decrease by nearly fifty percent. This caused oil,
which was formerly produced and sold at around \$110 a barrel prior to
the 2014 crash, to plummet to nearly \$27 a barrel by the beginning of
2016. This relationship worsened after the U.S. legislation passed a
bill of a that allowed victims of the 9/11 attacks to sue the Saudi
Arabian government for their losses in 2016.

In 2019, US Federal law enforcement officials launched an investigation
into cases involving the disappearance of Saudi Arabian students from
Oregon and other parts of the country, while they faced charges in the
US. Amidst the investigation, it has been speculated that the Saudi
government helped the students in escaping from the US.

![](media/image11.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6666666666666665in"}\
*U.S. President Barack Obama shakes hands with King Salman, Riyadh, 27
January 2015*

![](media/image12.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6666666666666665in"}\
*U.S. President Donald Trump, King Salman, and Egyptian President Abdel
Fattah el-Sisi, 21 May 2017*

Notable diplomatic visits
=========================

-   *After President George W. Bush's two visits to Saudi Arabia in
    2008—which was the first time a U.S. president visited a foreign
    country twice in less than four months—and King Abdullah's three
    visits to the US—2002, 2005 and 2008—the relations have surely
    reached their peak.*

-   *One of the most important reasons that King Abdullah has given full
    scholarships to young Saudis is to give them western perspective and
    to impart a positive impression of Saudi Arabia on the American
    people (Alslemy, 2008).*

After President George W. Bush's two visits to Saudi Arabia in
2008—which was the first time a U.S. president visited a foreign country
twice in less than four months—and King Abdullah's three visits to the
US—2002, 2005 and 2008—the relations have surely reached their
peak.\[citation needed\] The two nations have expanded their
relationship beyond oil and counter terrorism efforts. For example, King
Abdullah has allocated funds for young Saudis to study in the United
States. One of the most important reasons that King Abdullah has given
full scholarships to young Saudis is to give them western perspective
and to impart a positive impression of Saudi Arabia on the American
people (Alslemy, 2008).\[citation needed\] On the other hand, President
Bush discussed the world economic crisis and what the U.S.–Saudi
relationship can do about it (Tabassum, 2008). During meetings with the
Saudis, the Bush Administration took the Saudi policies very seriously
because of their prevalent economic and defensive presence in the region
and its great media influence on the Islamic world (Al Obaid 2007). By
and large, the two leaders have made many decisions that deal with
security, economics, and business aspects of the relationship, making it
in the top of its fame. (Gearan, 2008)\[citation needed\]

In early 2018, the Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman visited the United
States where he met with many top politicians, business people and
Hollywood stars, including President Donald Trump, Bill and Hillary
Clinton, Henry Kissinger, Bill Gates, Jeff Bezos and George W. Bush.

2017 US–Saudi Arms Deal
=======================

-   *US defense stocks reached all-time highs after Donald J. Trump
    announced a \$110 billion arms deal to Saudi Arabia.*

-   *US President Donald Trump authorized a nearly \$110B arms deal with
    Saudi Arabia, worth \$300B over a ten-year period, signed on the 20
    May 2017, this includes training and close co-operation with the
    Saudi Arabian military.*

US President Donald Trump authorized a nearly \$110B arms deal with
Saudi Arabia, worth \$300B over a ten-year period, signed on the 20 May
2017, this includes training and close co-operation with the Saudi
Arabian military. Signed documents included letters of interest and
letters of intent and no actual contracts.

US defense stocks reached all-time highs after Donald J. Trump announced
a \$110 billion arms deal to Saudi Arabia.

Saudi Arabia signed billions of dollars of deals with U.S. companies in
the arms industry and petroleum industry, including Lockheed Martin,
Boeing, Raytheon, General Dynamics, Northrop Grumman, General Electric,
Exxon Mobil, Halliburton, Honeywell, McDermott International, Jacobs
Engineering Group, National Oilwell Varco, Nabors Industries,
Weatherford International, Schlumberger and Dow Chemical.

In August, 2018, a laser-guided Mark 82 bomb sold by the U.S. and built
by Lockheed Martin was used in the Saudi-led coalition airstrike on a
school bus in Yemen, which killed 51 people, including 40 children.

See also
========

-   *Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Washington, D.C.*

-   *Saudi Americans*

-   *United States Ambassador to Saudi Arabia*

-   *United States withdrawal from Saudi Arabia*

-   *Saudi Arabia lobby in the United States*

-   *Foreign relations of Saudi Arabia*

Embassy of Saudi Arabia in Washington, D.C.

Foreign relations of Saudi Arabia

Foreign relations of the United States

Saudi Arabia lobby in the United States

United States Ambassador to Saudi Arabia

United States withdrawal from Saudi Arabia

Saudi Americans

Walid Fitaihi

References
==========

-   *Bilateral Relations Fact Sheets).*

-   * This article incorporates public domain material from the United
    States Department of State website
    https://www.state.gov/countries-areas/ (U.S.*

 This article incorporates public domain material from the United States
Department of State website https://www.state.gov/countries-areas/ (U.S.
Bilateral Relations Fact Sheets).

External links
==============

-   *Embassy of Saudi Arabia- Washington, DC*

-   *History of Saudi Arabia - U.S. relations*

-   *Saudi Arabia: Background and U.S. Relations*

History of Saudi Arabia - U.S. relations

Embassy of Saudi Arabia- Washington, DC

Embassy of U.S.A. - Riyadh

Consulate General of U.S.A. - Dhahran

Consulate General of U.S.A. - Jeddah

Odah Sultan Odah, Saudi-American Relations 1968-1972

Saudi Arabia: Background and U.S. Relations
