**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sha%27ar%20HaAmakim\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Sha'ar HaAmakim
===============

-   *Gate of the Valleys) is a kibbutz in northern Israel associated
    with the Hashomer Hatzair movement founded in 1935.*

-   *In 2017 it had a population of 711.*

-   *Sha'ar HaAmakim (Hebrew: .mw-parser-output
    .script-hebrew,.mw-parser-output
    .script-Hebr{font-size:1.15em;font-family:"Ezra SIL","Ezra SIL
    SR","Keter Aram Tsova","Taamey Ashkenaz","Taamey David CLM","Taamey
    Frank CLM","Frank Ruehl CLM","Keter YG","Shofar","David
    CLM","Hadasim CLM","Simple CLM","Nachlieli","SBL BibLit","SBL
    Hebrew",Cardo,Alef,"Noto Serif Hebrew","Noto Sans Hebrew","David
    Libre",David,"Times New Roman",Gisha,Arial,FreeSerif,FreeSans}שַׁעַר
    הַעֲמָקִים, lit.*

Sha'ar HaAmakim (Hebrew: .mw-parser-output
.script-hebrew,.mw-parser-output
.script-Hebr{font-size:1.15em;font-family:"Ezra SIL","Ezra SIL
SR","Keter Aram Tsova","Taamey Ashkenaz","Taamey David CLM","Taamey
Frank CLM","Frank Ruehl CLM","Keter YG","Shofar","David CLM","Hadasim
CLM","Simple CLM","Nachlieli","SBL BibLit","SBL Hebrew",Cardo,Alef,"Noto
Serif Hebrew","Noto Sans Hebrew","David Libre",David,"Times New
Roman",Gisha,Arial,FreeSerif,FreeSans}שַׁעַר הַעֲמָקִים, lit. Gate of
the Valleys) is a kibbutz in northern Israel associated with the
Hashomer Hatzair movement founded in 1935. Located near Kiryat Tiv'on,
it falls under the jurisdiction of Zevulun Regional Council. In 2017 it
had a population of 711.

History
=======

Antiquity
=========

-   *Although the site, in recent history, has borne the name of Ḫirbet
    el-Ḥârithîye, it is thought by modern-day archaeologists to have
    been the Second Temple-period site known as Geba (Greek: Γάβα),
    based on Josephus' description of distances between Geba and
    Simonias and Beit Shearim in Lower Galilee.*

Human habitation in the area dates at least as far back as the
Hellenistic period. Although the site, in recent history, has borne the
name of Ḫirbet el-Ḥârithîye, it is thought by modern-day archaeologists
to have been the Second Temple-period site known as Geba (Greek: Γάβα),
based on Josephus' description of distances between Geba and Simonias
and Beit Shearim in Lower Galilee.

Crusader era
============

-   *In 1283, during the hudna ("truce") between the Crusaders based in
    Acre and the Mamluk sultan al-Mansur Qalawun, this location was
    named el Harathiyah and was described as part of the domain of the
    Crusaders.*

In 1283, during the hudna ("truce") between the Crusaders based in Acre
and the Mamluk sultan al-Mansur Qalawun, this location was named el
Harathiyah and was described as part of the domain of the Crusaders.

Ottoman era
===========

-   *In 1882, the Palestine Exploration Fund's Survey of Western
    Palestine described it as an adobe hamlet.*

During the Ottoman era, a Muslim village at the site was called el
Hâritheh. The village appeared as El Harti on the map of Pierre Jacotin
compiled in 1799. In 1859, the population was recorded as 120 with
tillable land of 12 feddans. In 1875, Victor Guérin reported about 40
houses. In 1882, the Palestine Exploration Fund's Survey of Western
Palestine described it as an adobe hamlet.

A population list from about 1887 showed that Harithiyeh had about 120
inhabitants; all Muslims.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="5.478087270341208in"}\
*Horse-drawn and mechanical vehicles at the kibbutz' flour mill in the
1950s*

British Mandate era
===================

-   *According to the Department of Statistics, however, Sha'ar HaAmakim
    had previously been part of Sheikh Bureik.*

-   *According to Avneri, Hartiya land was to become Sha'ar HaAmakim.*

-   *Kibbutz Sha'ar HaAmakim was founded in 1935 by immigrants from
    Romania and Yugoslavia.*

-   *By the 1945 statistics it had a population of 360, all Jews.*

In the 1922 census of Palestine, conducted by the British Mandate
authorities, the Al Zubaidat, who cultivated the Hartieh land, numbered
363, all Muslims.

In 1925 a Zionist organisation purchased 50 feddans in Hartieh from the
Sursock family of Beirut. At the time, there were 60 families living
there. In the 1931 census, the Arab Zubeidat was counted under the
Shefa-'Amr suburbs.

From 1931, and lasting several years, the Jewish Agency struggled to
evict the Arab El Zubeidat, who were tenant farmers at Hartiya.
According to Avneri, Hartiya land was to become Sha'ar HaAmakim.\
According to the Department of Statistics, however, Sha'ar HaAmakim had
previously been part of Sheikh Bureik.

Kibbutz Sha'ar HaAmakim was founded in 1935 by immigrants from Romania
and Yugoslavia. One of its founders was Aharon Cohen, later to be
convicted of spying for the Soviet Union. Its name was derived from the
nearby confluence of the Jezreel and Zevulun valleys. By the 1945
statistics it had a population of 360, all Jews.

State of Israel
===============

-   *Sha'ar HaAmakim hosted volunteers from around the world, including
    France and the United States, who worked at the kibbutz and
    participated in cultural exchanges.*

-   *Senator, worked at the kibbutz for several months in 1963.*

Sha'ar HaAmakim hosted volunteers from around the world, including
France and the United States, who worked at the kibbutz and participated
in cultural exchanges. In the 1960s, there were up to 100 volunteers
each year. Bernie Sanders, who later became a U.S. Senator, worked at
the kibbutz for several months in 1963.

Economy
=======

-   *For over five decades, the kibbutz has produced and processed
    sunflower seeds which it markets under its name both in Israel and
    for export.*

-   *According to a 2016 report, the kibbutz derives most of its income
    from its solar water heater factory.*

According to a 2016 report, the kibbutz derives most of its income from
its solar water heater factory. It also makes money from agriculture,
including dairy farming. For over five decades, the kibbutz has produced
and processed sunflower seeds which it markets under its name both in
Israel and for export. It also has a fish pond and orchards producing
apples, peaches, and pears.

References
==========

Bibliography
============

External links
==============

-   *Survey of Western Palestine, Map 5: IAA, Wikimedia commons*

-   *Kibbutz website*

Kibbutz website

Survey of Western Palestine, Map 5: IAA, Wikimedia commons
