**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shelley%20Moore%20Capito\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Shelley Moore Capito
====================

-   *She was the only Republican in the West Virginia congressional
    delegation until 2011, and the first Republican woman elected to
    Congress from West Virginia.*

-   *Capito was elected to the Senate in 2014, becoming the first woman
    elected to the U.S. Senate in the history of West Virginia and the
    first Republican to win a full term in the Senate from West Virginia
    since 1942.*

Shelley Wellons Moore Capito (born November 26, 1953) is an American
politician serving as the junior United States Senator from West
Virginia since 2015. A Republican, she is the daughter of three-term
West Virginia governor Arch Alfred Moore Jr. She was the U.S.
Representative for West Virginia's 2nd congressional district from 2001
until her election to the Senate. She is the current dean of West
Virginia's congressional delegation.

She was the only Republican in the West Virginia congressional
delegation until 2011, and the first Republican woman elected to
Congress from West Virginia. Capito was elected to the Senate in 2014,
becoming the first woman elected to the U.S. Senate in the history of
West Virginia and the first Republican to win a full term in the Senate
from West Virginia since 1942.

Early life and education
========================

-   *She was born in Glen Dale, West Virginia, the daughter of Shelley
    (née Riley) and Arch Alfred Moore Jr., who served three terms as the
    state's Governor.*

-   *At the start of her career, Capito was a career counselor at West
    Virginia State University and director of the educational
    information center for the West Virginia Board of Regents.*

She was born in Glen Dale, West Virginia, the daughter of Shelley (née
Riley) and Arch Alfred Moore Jr., who served three terms as the state's
Governor. A resident of Charleston, Capito was educated at the
Holton-Arms School, a private college-preparatory school in Bethesda,
Maryland; Duke University, where she earned her bachelor's degree in
zoology; and the University of Virginia Curry School of Education, where
she earned her master's degree. She is a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma
sorority and represented the state of West Virginia as the 1972 Cherry
Blossom Princess. At the start of her career, Capito was a career
counselor at West Virginia State University and director of the
educational information center for the West Virginia Board of Regents.

Earlier political career
========================

-   *Capito was named Minority Chairman of the Health and Human
    Resources Committee and a member of the Judiciary and Banking and
    Insurance Committees.*

-   *Capito was elected to the 31st district of the West Virginia House
    of Delegates in 1996, and served two terms from December 1, 1996 to
    December 1, 2000.*

Capito was elected to the 31st district of the West Virginia House of
Delegates in 1996, and served two terms from December 1, 1996 to
December 1, 2000. The district included a portion of the Charleston
area. Capito was named Minority Chairman of the Health and Human
Resources Committee and a member of the Judiciary and Banking and
Insurance Committees.

U.S. House of Representatives
=============================

Elections
=========

2000
====

-   *Congressman Bob Wise ran for governor in 2000, Capito ran as a
    Republican in the open seat in West Virginia's 2nd district, which
    was anchored in Charleston and stretched from the Ohio River in the
    west to the Eastern Panhandle, which borders with Virginia and
    Maryland.*

-   *She was the first Republican to represent West Virginia in Congress
    since 1983, as well as the first woman elected to Congress from West
    Virginia who was not the widow of a member of Congress.*

When U.S. Congressman Bob Wise ran for governor in 2000, Capito ran as a
Republican in the open seat in West Virginia's 2nd district, which was
anchored in Charleston and stretched from the Ohio River in the west to
the Eastern Panhandle, which borders with Virginia and Maryland. She
narrowly defeated the Democratic nominee, lawyer Jim Humphreys, 48%–46%.
She was the first Republican to represent West Virginia in Congress
since 1983, as well as the first woman elected to Congress from West
Virginia who was not the widow of a member of Congress.\[citation
needed\]

2002
====

-   *She became the first West Virginia Republican to win re-election to
    Congress since her father, who represented the 1st district in the
    state's northern region from 1957 to 1969.*

She won re-election to a second term, defeating Humphreys in rematch
60%–40%. She won every county in the district except Braxton. She became
the first West Virginia Republican to win re-election to Congress since
her father, who represented the 1st district in the state's northern
region from 1957 to 1969.\[citation needed\]

2004
====

-   *She won re-election to a third term, defeating former newscaster
    Erik Wells 57%–42%.*

She won re-election to a third term, defeating former newscaster Erik
Wells 57%–42%.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.673196631671041in"}\
*Capito surveys safe drinking water with a FEMA contingency and U.S. Air
Force Col. Jerome Gouhin.*

2006
====

-   *Capito was mentioned as a possible challenger to Senator Robert
    Byrd, a long-time foe of her father, in 2006, but opted to run for
    re-election to her House seat.*

Capito was mentioned as a possible challenger to Senator Robert Byrd, a
long-time foe of her father, in 2006, but opted to run for re-election
to her House seat. She won re-election to a fourth term, defeating the
state's Department of Environmental Protection Secretary Mike Callaghan,
57%–43%. She won all but two counties: Braxton and Clay.

2008
====

-   *Capito won re-election to a fifth term, defeating Anne Barth, a
    long-time former aide to U.S.*

Capito won re-election to a fifth term, defeating Anne Barth, a
long-time former aide to U.S. Senator Robert Byrd, 57%–43%. She won all
but two counties: Braxton and Jefferson.

2010
====

-   *Capito won re-election to a sixth term, defeating Virginia Lynch
    Graf, 68%–30%.*

-   *Capito ultimately decided against a Senate bid, even though the
    West Virginia Legislature had recently passed a law that would have
    allowed her to run for both her House seat and the Senate.*

During the 2010 election cycle, she was mentioned as a Republican
candidate to challenge Joe Manchin for the vacated United State Senate
seat of the late Robert C. Byrd. Capito ultimately decided against a
Senate bid, even though the West Virginia Legislature had recently
passed a law that would have allowed her to run for both her House seat
and the Senate. Capito won re-election to a sixth term, defeating
Virginia Lynch Graf, 68%–30%. For the first time in her career, she won
all 18 counties of the district.

2012
====

-   *Capito is a former Chairman of the Congressional Caucus for Women's
    Issues and a member of the Congressional Arts Caucus and the
    Afterschool Caucuses.*

-   *After an explosion responsible for the death of 29 coal workers,
    Capito founded the Congressional Coal Caucus.*

-   *After redistricting, Capito was challenged in the Republican
    primary for the first time in her career.*

After redistricting, Capito was challenged in the Republican primary for
the first time in her career. She defeated Delegate Jonathan Miller and
Michael Davis 83%–11%–6%. She won re-election to a seventh term,
defeating former gubernatorial aide Howard Swint, 70%–30%.

Committee assignments

Committee on Financial Services\
Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Credit (Chairwoman)\
Subcommittee on Insurance, Housing and Community Opportunity

Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure\
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit\
Subcommittee on Railroads, Pipelines, and Hazardous Materials\
Subcommittee on Water Resources and Environment

Caucus memberships

Capito is a former Chairman of the Congressional Caucus for Women's
Issues and a member of the Congressional Arts Caucus and the Afterschool
Caucuses.\
After an explosion responsible for the death of 29 coal workers, Capito
founded the Congressional Coal Caucus.

U.S. Senate
===========

Elections
=========

2014
====

-   *Despite initial protests from Tea Party groups and
    anti-establishment conservatives that Moore Capito's House voting
    record was "too liberal", she ultimately won 87% of the Republican
    primary vote.*

-   *Rockefeller dropped out of the race on January 11, 2013, making
    Capito the overwhelming favorite in the general election.*

On November 26, 2012, Capito announced her intention to run for the
United States Senate in 2014, intending to challenge Democratic
incumbent Jay Rockefeller, but he subsequently announced his retirement.

Capito's "Shared Values" commercial featured her saying, "We want our
country back; we don't want government coming in and telling us how to
pick our doctor, how to educate our children." Despite initial protests
from Tea Party groups and anti-establishment conservatives that Moore
Capito's House voting record was "too liberal", she ultimately won 87%
of the Republican primary vote.

Rockefeller dropped out of the race on January 11, 2013, making Capito
the overwhelming favorite in the general election.

She went on to defeat Democratic Secretary of State Natalie Tennant in
the general election, 62% to 35% - the largest victory margin for a
Republican running in a statewide race in West Virginia history. She
also carried every county in the state.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="3.659332895888014in" height="5.5in"}\
*Capito Congressional photo 2013*

Tenure
======

-   *Capito served on the House Page Board during the Mark Foley
    congressional page incident, in which Mark Foley, a Republican
    Congressman from Florida, sent sexually explicit messages to teenage
    boys who had previously served as Congressional Pages.*

-   *However, Capito wasn't made aware of Foley's conduct until informed
    by the press.*

-   *Along with Rob Portman and Deb Fischer, Capito is one of Mitch
    McConnell's counsels to leadership in the Senate.*

Along with Rob Portman and Deb Fischer, Capito is one of Mitch
McConnell's counsels to leadership in the Senate.

Capito served on the House Page Board during the Mark Foley
congressional page incident, in which Mark Foley, a Republican
Congressman from Florida, sent sexually explicit messages to teenage
boys who had previously served as Congressional Pages. However, Capito
wasn't made aware of Foley's conduct until informed by the press.

Committee assignments

Committee on Appropriations\
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related Agencies\
Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government (Chairwoman)\
Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies\
Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related
Agencies\
Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, and Related
Agencies\
Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and
Related Agencies

Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation\
Subcommittee on Aviation Operations, Safety, and Security\
Subcommittee on Communications, Technology, Innovation, and the
Internet\
Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Product Safety, Insurance and Data
Security\
Subcommittee on Space, Science, and Competitiveness\
Subcommittee on Surface Transportation and Merchant Marine
Infrastructure, Safety, and Security

Committee on Environment and Public Works\
Subcommittee on Clean Air and Nuclear Safety (Chairwoman)\
Subcommittee on Fisheries, Water and Wildlife\
Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure

Committee on Rules and Administration

Political positions
===================

-   *The American Conservative Union has given Capito a lifetime rating
    of 67.2% conservative.*

-   *Since being in Congress, Capito has voted with her party 96% of the
    time.*

-   *According to GovTrack's 2017 analysis, Capito is more moderate than
    more than 30 of her Republican colleagues in the Senate, but more
    conservative than several others.*

Since being in Congress, Capito has voted with her party 96% of the
time. She is relatively moderate and has crossed the aisle on some
votes. The Lugar Center and McCourt School of Public Policy ranked
Senator Capito as the seventh most bipartisan member of Congress based
on her tenure in the House and Senate.In 2013, the National Journal gave
her a composite score of 63% conservative and 37% liberal. In 2011,
still in the House, the National Journal gave her a composite score of
56% conservative and 45% liberal. The New York Times arranged
Republicans based on ideology and reported that Capito was the third
most moderate Republican Senator as of 2017. According to GovTrack's
2017 analysis, Capito is more moderate than more than 30 of her
Republican colleagues in the Senate, but more conservative than several
others. The American Conservative Union has given Capito a lifetime
rating of 67.2% conservative. She also has a 95% lifetime rating from
the conservative Americans for Prosperity. Heritage Action gives her a
lifetime 46% conservative score. The Americans for Democratic Action
gave her a rating of 15% liberal in 2011 and 60% liberal, her highest,
in 2008.

Describing her political positions, the Washington Post wrote that
"Capito has been something of a wildcard in Congress, befitting the
mixed blue and red political strains of her home state. Conservatives
have criticized her for being too centrist, and she has been at odds
with the tea party movement by opposing funding cuts to various federal
programs. She does not believe that Roe v. Wade should be overturned,
but has voted to ban abortions after 20 weeks and has cast other
antiabortion votes. Capito has also been a stalwart supporter of the
coal industry, introducing mining safety measures and campaigning
against the Environmental Protection Agency."

Donald Trump's candidacy and presidency
=======================================

-   *In 2016, Capito raised concerns about Trump's tone and rhetoric
    during the election.*

-   *According to FiveThirtyEight, which tracks how often a
    Congressperson votes with President Trump's position, Capito voted
    with Trump's position 95.7% of the time.*

-   *After the Hollywood Access tapes, Capito said that Trump should
    "reexamine his candidacy."*

In 2016, Capito raised concerns about Trump's tone and rhetoric during
the election. After the Hollywood Access tapes, Capito said that Trump
should "reexamine his candidacy." However, she later said that she
supported Trump for president. According to FiveThirtyEight, which
tracks how often a Congressperson votes with President Trump's position,
Capito voted with Trump's position 95.7% of the time.

Social policy
=============

-   *Capito is sponsoring the Rural Access to Hospice Act to improve the
    quality, access, and retention of hospice facilities in rural parts
    of the nation.*

-   *On social policy, the National Journal gave Capito a score of 54%
    conservative and 43% liberal.*

-   *\
    Capito is a sponsor of the Gender Advancement in Pay (GAP) Act,
    saying "it should be common sense that women and men get equal pay
    for equal work" and expressing concerns about sex discrimination
    against women in the workplace.*

Capito is a sponsor of the Gender Advancement in Pay (GAP) Act, saying
"it should be common sense that women and men get equal pay for equal
work" and expressing concerns about sex discrimination against women in
the workplace. Capito is sponsoring the Rural Access to Hospice Act to
improve the quality, access, and retention of hospice facilities in
rural parts of the nation.

On social policy, the National Journal gave Capito a score of 54%
conservative and 43% liberal.

LGBT rights
===========

-   *The Human Rights Campaign gave Capito a score of 30% in the 113th
    Congress and 64% in the 114th Congress.*

-   *Based on her scores from Human Rights Campaign, an LGBT rights
    advocacy group, Capito has a mixed record on LGBT issues.*

-   *In 2004 and 2006, Capito voted for the failed Federal Marriage
    Amendment which was intended to ban same-sex marriage in the United
    States.*

Based on her scores from Human Rights Campaign, an LGBT rights advocacy
group, Capito has a mixed record on LGBT issues. The Human Rights
Campaign gave Capito a score of 30% in the 113th Congress and 64% in the
114th Congress. She received a 0% in the 115th Congress.

In 2004 and 2006, Capito voted for the failed Federal Marriage Amendment
which was intended to ban same-sex marriage in the United States. She
also voted against hate crime legislation that included sexual
orientation. In 2007 she voted against the Employment Non-Discrimination
Act and she voted against repealing the Don't Ask Don't Tell policy.

In 2009, she was one of 44 House Republicans who voted for the 2009-2010
Defense Appropriations bill which expanded the legal definition of a
'hate crime' to include crimes committed because of someone's gender
identity. In 2013, she voted in favor of the Violence Against Women
Reauthorization Act which included provisions to assist victims
regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity and which prohibits
funds from being given to programs that discriminate on the basis of
sexual orientation or gender identity.

In 2015, she was one of 10 Senate Republicans who voted for an amendment
to the Runaway and Homeless Youth Act which provided support and
protections for LGBT youth. Capito also voted with a majority of
Democrats in favor of a non-binding resolution which affirmed the need
for same-sex married couples to be able to access Social Security and
veterans' benefits. This made her one of just 11 Senate Republicans who
endorsed same-sex marriage benefits.

In response to the Supreme Court's decision in Obergefell v. Hodges,
which found a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, Capito issued a
statement saying "While I would have preferred that the Supreme Court
leave this decision to the states, it is my hope that all West
Virginians will move forward and continue to care for and respect one
another."

Abortion
========

-   *Capito supported Trump's Supreme Court nominee, Brett Kavanaugh;
    when asked about Roe v Wade, "Capito said she does not think the
    court will overturn the ruling.*

-   *Capito voted for parental consent for minors seeking an abortion
    and voted to rescind federal funds from Planned Parenthood.*

-   *Her campaign said that Capito "would not vote to overturn Roe."*

In a questionnaire by Project Vote Smart, Capito described herself as
"pro-choice," but she has a mixed record on abortion. She is one of
three Republican Senators, along with Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa
Murkowski of Alaska, who publicly support the Supreme Court's Roe v.
Wade decision. She has mixed ratings from various pro-life organizations
opposing legal abortion and pro-choice organizations advocating for
legal access to abortion. Her highest score from NARAL Pro-Choice
America is 50% from 2007 and her highest pro-life score from the
National Right to Life Committee is 100% from several years including
2018. In 2002, her third largest campaign contributor was The WISH List,
a pro-choice Republican PAC. West Virginians for Life did not endorse
her in 2012, but did endorse her for Senate in 2014. She was endorsed by
both West Virginians for Life, a pro-life PAC, and by Republican
Majority for Choice, a pro-choice PAC.

She has voted against federal funding for abortion and for the
Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act, but voted against banning
family-planning funding in US aid and voted against the Hyde Amendment,
an amendment that bans federal funding for abortion. She also voted in
favor of a 2007 amendment to allow federal funding for family
planning.She voted to allow private funding for abortions on US military
bases in a 2005 amendment, one of 22 House Republicans to do so. Capito
voted for parental consent for minors seeking an abortion and voted to
rescind federal funds from Planned Parenthood. She was one of nine
Republicans who voted against banning funds for mifepristone or the
'abortion pill.' In 2017, she was one of three Republicans, with Collins
and Murkowski, who opposed a bill to repeal the ACA that included
defunding Planned Parenthood. Also in 2017, she was one of seven
Republicans who voted against a bill that included defunding Planned
Parenthood. In 2018, Capito voted with most Republicans and three
Democrats for a bill to ban abortion after 20 weeks of pregnancy. She
voted with her party in 2018 to ban federal funding from facilities that
promote abortion or family planning. In 2019, Capito voted with a
majority of Republicans and three Democrats in favor of a bill that
required that doctors provide care and medical intervention for infants
born alive after a failed abortion. Capito was among the Republicans who
opposed a law that would ban abortion in nearly all cases, without
exceptions for rape or incest, calling such a law "very very
restrictive."

In 2013, Capito's campaign manager stated that "she does not want to
overturn Roe v. Wade". Her campaign said that Capito "would not vote to
overturn Roe." According to Fox News, "Three Republican senators – Lisa
Murkowski of Alaska, Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia and Susan
Collins of Maine – have indicated they will not vote for a Supreme Court
nominee who suggests he or she might not respect the precedent of
earlier rulings allowing abortion".

In 2017, "West Virginians for Life, said \[it\] still supports Capito,
despite the abortion rights self-identification and support for Roe v.
Wade, because of Capito's steadfast voting record restricting abortions
and defunding Planned Parenthood". In 2018, West Virginians for Life
endorsed a ballot initiative to ban abortion in the event that Roe is
overturned; Capito said she is "not going to openly support or oppose"
the ballot initiative. Capito supported Trump's Supreme Court nominee,
Brett Kavanaugh; when asked about Roe v Wade, "Capito said she does not
think the court will overturn the ruling. 'Fundamentally, it's been a
precedent for a long time,' she said." She said that the precedent was a
factor in her consideration.

Sexual assault
==============

-   *She and Senator Joe Manchin announced \$899,927 for the West
    Virginia Foundation for Rape Information and Services through the
    U.S. Department of Justice's Office on Violence Against Women in
    August 2018.*

-   *Capito is partnering with Democrats Kirsten Gillibrand, Patty
    Murray, Amy Klobuchar and other bipartisan congresspeople to update
    the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995, that would "help
    prevent sexual harassment and discrimination in Congress and create
    more transparency and accountability in the reporting process for
    survivors."*

Capito is partnering with Democrats Kirsten Gillibrand, Patty Murray,
Amy Klobuchar and other bipartisan congresspeople to update the
Congressional Accountability Act of 1995, that would "help prevent
sexual harassment and discrimination in Congress and create more
transparency and accountability in the reporting process for survivors."
She and Senator Joe Manchin announced \$899,927 for the West Virginia
Foundation for Rape Information and Services through the U.S. Department
of Justice's Office on Violence Against Women in August 2018.

Embryonic stem-cell research
============================

-   *Previously, Capito had voted for a bill to ban the cloning of human
    embryos.*

-   *Also in 2007, Capito again voted in favor of funding stem-cell
    research.*

-   *In June 2007, Capito voted against banning the cloning of human
    embryos.*

-   *Capito supports embryonic stem cell research.*

-   *Capito also voted in 2006 to attempt to override President Bush's
    veto of the 2005 bill.*

Capito supports embryonic stem cell research. In May 2005, as a
representative, Capito broke with her party, voting with a majority of
Democrats, to repeal restrictions on embryonic stem-cell research
funding. Capito also voted in 2006 to attempt to override President
Bush's veto of the 2005 bill. In June 2007, Capito voted against banning
the cloning of human embryos. Previously, Capito had voted for a bill to
ban the cloning of human embryos. Also in 2007, Capito again voted in
favor of funding stem-cell research. She also voted in favor of research
using stem cells derived from donated embryos. In 2009, Capito voted for
a budget bill that prohibited the creation of human embryos for
research.

Gun policy
==========

-   *In 2016, Capito voted in favor of alerting law enforcement when a
    person suspected of terrorism attempts to purchase a firearm and in
    favor of an amendment to improve the National Instant Background
    Check System, but she voted against two other gun control
    amendments.*

-   *Capito was endorsed by the National Rifle Association (NRA) and
    West Virginia Citizen's Defense League which both support gun
    owners' rights in 2014.*

-   *In 2018, Capito opposed President Trump's suggestion that teachers
    be armed saying "I don't think a teacher should carry a gun in a
    classroom."*

Capito was endorsed by the National Rifle Association (NRA) and West
Virginia Citizen's Defense League which both support gun owners' rights
in 2014. In 2016, Capito voted in favor of alerting law enforcement when
a person suspected of terrorism attempts to purchase a firearm and in
favor of an amendment to improve the National Instant Background Check
System, but she voted against two other gun control amendments. In 2018,
Capito opposed President Trump's suggestion that teachers be armed
saying "I don't think a teacher should carry a gun in a classroom."

Healthcare
==========

-   *Capito was one of the Republicans suggesting that "the Republican
    healthcare proposals are too conservative."*

-   *In 2018, Capito voted for the bipartisan Opioid Crisis Response Act
    to address the nation's opioid crisis.*

-   *In January 2009, Capito voted to expand the Children's Health
    Insurance Program (CHIP) as part of its re-authorization.*

As a representative, Capito voted against the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (commonly called ObamaCare or the Affordable Care
Act) in March 2010. Since then, she has voted repeatedly to repeal the
Affordable Care Act. In July 2017, Capito said she was opposed to
repealing the ACA without a replacement proposal. She was one of the
three Republican senators, along with Susan Collins and Lisa Murkowski,
who blocked a bill to repeal the ACA without a replacement early in the
attempted repeal process. This resulted in a backlash among some
conservatives. Radio host and conservative personality, Rush Limbaugh,
criticized Capito, along with Collins and Murkowski, as "leftists." The
Club for Growth and Tea Party Patriots later launched online ads to
pressure Capito to vote for other bills to repeal Obamacare. Later that
July, she voted to repeal the ACA.\[108\]

She was one of a few Republicans who broke with their party in favor of
the State Children's Health Insurance Program. In January 2009, Capito
voted to expand the Children's Health Insurance Program (CHIP) as part
of its re-authorization. The expanded coverage would include about four
million more children in the program. In May 2008, Capito voted for the
Post-9/11 Veterans Educational Assistance Act of 2008 (commonly called
the new G.I. Bill), which expanded the educational benefits for military
veterans who have served since September 11, 2001. During the 112th
Congress, she voted for H.R. 525 to expand the ACA grant programs to
make "veterinarians eligible for public health workforce grants and loan
repayment." In 2014, she supported repealing the Affordable Care Act
(ACA).

On March 3, 2017, Capito "insist\[ed\] that Medicaid expansion be
preserved in the GOP's Obamacare replacement proposal". Along with three
other Republicans, Capito signed a letter saying that the House
Republican health care plan "does not do enough to protect families and
individuals covered by the Medicaid expansion or to provide flexibility
to the states". Capito was one of the Republicans suggesting that "the
Republican healthcare proposals are too conservative." She came out
against the Better Care Reconciliation Act because of her opposition to
a conservative amendment to the bill as well as over opioid issues.

In 2018, Capito voted for the bipartisan Opioid Crisis Response Act to
address the nation's opioid crisis. She also voted to increase
Telemedicine funding in five West Virginia counties.

Immigration
===========

-   *Special interest groups for and against immigration reform have
    given Capito mixed ratings.*

-   *Capito voiced disagreement with Trump's "zero-tolerance" policy
    that included separating children from their parents or guardians.*

-   *In 2010, Capito voted against the DREAM Act.*

-   *"While Capito is campaigning for border streamlining, she said
    separating families, a result of President Trump's Zero Tolerance
    Policy, is not necessary."*

Capito has stated that she does not support a pathway to citizenship for
undocumented immigrants, but did vote against a 2004 bill that would
have forced hospitals to report undocumented immigrants; she also voted
in favor of a 2001 bill that proposed to allow some immigrants to
"remain in the country while pursuing residency." In 2010, Capito voted
against the DREAM Act. In 2018, Capito said of DACA and immigration,
"It's probably going to be some sort of legal status for DACA recipients
that gives them the permanence of legal status and then the border
security..." Speaking about her views on DACA Capito's office said that
she "could support an immigration solution that provides for increased
border security to protect Americans and provides relief for those in
the DACA program. She is encouraged by ongoing negotiations between the
Trump Administration and members of Congress to improve immigration
policy and add resources for enforcement."

In 2018, Capito voted to withhold federal funding from sanctuary cities,
voted against the McCain-Coons proposal to offer a pathway to
citizenship without funding for a border wall, voted against Senator
Collins' bipartisan bill to increase funding for border security and
offer a pathway to citizenship, and voted in favor of Trump's proposal
to offer a pathway to citizenship for 1.8 million undocumented
immigrants while reducing legal immigration numbers and using federal
funds to build a border wall. In December, 2018, Capito supported a
bipartisan compromise funding bill that would have given 1.6 billion
dollars, instead of the 5 billion requested by Trump, toward a border
wall to avoid a government shutdown.

Capito voiced disagreement with Trump's "zero-tolerance" policy that
included separating children from their parents or guardians. She said
"we need to keep the families together," speaking to the media. "While
Capito is campaigning for border streamlining, she said separating
families, a result of President Trump's Zero Tolerance Policy, is not
necessary." In 2019, she supported legislation to increase funding and
humanitarian aid for "relief and comfort for migrants" on the US
southern border. She also voted in committee for a bipartisan plan with
\$4.6 billion in funding with "\$2.9 billion for the care of migrant
children and \$1.3 billion to improve facilities at the border."

Special interest groups for and against immigration reform have given
Capito mixed ratings. NumbersUSA, which opposes illegal immigration and
seeks to reduce legal immigration, gave Capito an 81% score and the
Federation for American Immigration Reform, which also opposes illegal
immigration and wants to reduce legal immigration, gave her an 88%
score; conversely, the Hispanic Federation and Unidos(US), which both
support immigration, gave Capito a 59% rating.

Drug policy
===========

-   *Capito disagreed with U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions' 2018
    decision to take a hardline approach to marijuana, saying "I'm going
    to go on the record as saying I'm against recreational marijuana,
    but I respect the states' rights to make that decision..." She also
    said that she has concerns but that she accepts and supports the
    legalization of medical marijuana.*

Capito disagreed with U.S. Attorney General Jeff Sessions' 2018 decision
to take a hardline approach to marijuana, saying "I'm going to go on the
record as saying I'm against recreational marijuana, but I respect the
states' rights to make that decision..." She also said that she has
concerns but that she accepts and supports the legalization of medical
marijuana. She received a 42% rating from the National Organization for
the Reform of Marijuana Laws which supports the decriminalization of
marijuana.

Environmental policy
====================

-   *In February 2019, in response to reports of the EPA intending to
    decide against setting drinking water limits for perfluorooctane
    sulfonic acid (PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) as part of an
    upcoming national strategy to manage the aforementioned class of
    chemicals, Capito was one of twenty senators to sign a letter to
    Acting EPA Administrator Andrew R. Wheeler calling on the agency "to
    develop enforceable federal drinking water standards for PFOA and
    PFOS, as well as institute immediate actions to protect the public
    from contamination from additional per- and polyfluoroalkyl
    substances (PFAS)."*

In February 2019, in response to reports of the EPA intending to decide
against setting drinking water limits for perfluorooctane sulfonic acid
(PFOS) and perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) as part of an upcoming national
strategy to manage the aforementioned class of chemicals, Capito was one
of twenty senators to sign a letter to Acting EPA Administrator Andrew
R. Wheeler calling on the agency "to develop enforceable federal
drinking water standards for PFOA and PFOS, as well as institute
immediate actions to protect the public from contamination from
additional per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS)."

Foreign policy
==============

-   *Capito was one of 47 Republican senators to sign Senator Tom
    Cotton's open letter to the Iranian government in 2015.*

-   *Capito has criticized the vulnerabilities in current national
    security policy in the wake of the San Bernardino terrorist attack
    and has sponsored 8 bills on the military and national security.*

-   *Capito has sponsored approximately 40 bills about international
    trade and international finance, the most of any other legislative
    topic during her career.*

Capito has sponsored approximately 40 bills about international trade
and international finance, the most of any other legislative topic
during her career. Capito has criticized the vulnerabilities in current
national security policy in the wake of the San Bernardino terrorist
attack and has sponsored 8 bills on the military and national security.
Capito was one of 47 Republican senators to sign Senator Tom Cotton's
open letter to the Iranian government in 2015. The letter, which sought
to dissuade Iran from reaching an agreement with President Barack Obama
regarding nuclear peace, was described by the White House as
"undercutting foreign policy".

On foreign policy, the National Journal gave her a score of 77%
conservative and 15% liberal.

International trade
===================

-   *In 2005, Capito voted against the Dominican Republic–Central
    America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), the major trade agreement
    negotiated under President George W. Bush.*

In 2005, Capito voted against the Dominican Republic–Central America
Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA), the major trade agreement negotiated under
President George W. Bush. She voted Yes in 2003, 2004, and 2007 to
approve free trade agreements with Chile, Singapore, Australia, and
Peru. She supports tariffs against countries that manipulate currencies,
and she sponsored a bill that would create an import fee on countries
with an undervalued currency.

Interior policy
===============

-   *Capito opposes legislation aimed at capping greenhouse gas
    emissions.*

-   *Capito supported President Donald Trump's decision to withdraw from
    the Paris climate agreement.*

-   *Capito supports the Republican Main Street Partnership's motion to
    elevate the EPA to be a Cabinet-level department, which would bring
    more oversight to the entity.*

Capito supports the Republican Main Street Partnership's motion to
elevate the EPA to be a Cabinet-level department, which would bring more
oversight to the entity.

Capito opposes legislation aimed at capping greenhouse gas emissions. In
January 2010, she reportedly asked the president if he would reconsider
"job-killing" policies like limiting greenhouse gases.

Capito supported President Donald Trump's decision to withdraw from the
Paris climate agreement. She called the decision "the right decision for
the American economy and workers in West Virginia and across the
country."

Fiscal policy
=============

-   *In 2006, Capito joined Democrats to vote for an increase of the
    minimum wage.*

-   *In 2001, then Rep. Capito voted in favor of the Bush tax cuts.*

-   *In 2011, while in the House, Capito voted for a Balanced Budget
    Amendment to the United States Constitution.*

-   *In 2012, during her campaign for the Senate, the Senate
    Conservative Fund opposed Capito's nomination as they argued "her
    spending record in the House is too liberal."*

In 2016, the fiscally conservative PAC, The Club for Growth, gave her a
50% lifetime rating. In 2011, while in the House, Capito voted for a
Balanced Budget Amendment to the United States Constitution.

In December 2010, Capito voted to extend the tax cuts enacted during the
administration of President George W. Bush.

Capito supports a federal prohibition on online poker, an in 2006, was a
cosponsor of H.R. 4777, the Internet Gambling Prohibition and
Enforcement Act. She also supported H.R. 4411, the Goodlatte-Leach
Internet Gambling Prohibition Act. In June 2003, Capito introduced the
Family Fairness in Taxing Act of 2003. The bill would accelerate the
increase to the child tax credit, increase the qualification age for
children, and revise refundability criteria for the credit.

In 2001, then Rep. Capito voted in favor of the Bush tax cuts. In 2002,
she supported partially privatizing Social Security but opposed complete
privatization. In 2006, Capito joined Democrats to vote for an increase
of the minimum wage. In 2012, during her campaign for the Senate, the
Senate Conservative Fund opposed Capito's nomination as they argued "her
spending record in the House is too liberal." In 2013, she voted against
cutting funding for food stamps. In 2017, Capito opposed the budget
proposed by President Trump saying that the proposal would cut "too
close to the bone." In 2017, Capito noted that she supports fully
repealing the Estate Tax. She also voted in favor of Trump's tax cut
bill. In 2019, she came out against budget cuts being proposed by the
Trump administration. Capito was among a few Republicans, including Joni
Ernst of Iowa and Susan Collins of Maine, who expressed criticism of
Trump's nominee to the Federal Reserve, Stephen Moore, because of
comments he had made about women, and he ultimately withdrew his
nomination. On economic issues, the National Journal gave her a rating
of 53% conservative and 47% liberal.

Judiciary
=========

-   *Capito opposed having a hearing for President Obama's nominee,
    Merrick Garland, to the Supreme Court.*

-   *After President Trump named a second Supreme Court nominee, Capito
    announced her support for the nominee, Brett Kavanaugh, and after he
    was accused of sexual assault, she continued to support his
    nomination.*

Capito opposed having a hearing for President Obama's nominee, Merrick
Garland, to the Supreme Court. In 2017, she voted to confirm President
Trump's first Supreme Court nominee, Neil Gorsuch. After President Trump
named a second Supreme Court nominee, Capito announced her support for
the nominee, Brett Kavanaugh, and after he was accused of sexual
assault, she continued to support his nomination. However, she also said
she considered the allegation to be serious and was among the handful of
Republican Senators asking for a vote to be delayed in order to hear
from the accuser and from Kavanaugh. Some of her fellow alumnae from the
Holton-Arms School personally delivered to her a letter signed by more
than a thousand alumnae of the school, saying that they believe
Kavanaugh's accuser because her allegations are "all too consistent with
stories we heard and lived" while attending Holton-Arms.

In March 2019, Capito was one of twelve senators to cosponsor a
resolution that would impose a constitutional amendment limiting the
Supreme Court to nine justices. The resolution was introduced following
multiple Democratic presidential candidates expressing openness to the
idea of expanding the seats on the Supreme Court.

Vice presidential speculation
=============================

-   *Capito was considered a possible contender for vice president on
    the Republican ticket with Donald Trump in 2016, and in May 2016 was
    one of several Senators to meet with Trump in Washington, D.C.*

Capito was considered a possible contender for vice president on the
Republican ticket with Donald Trump in 2016, and in May 2016 was one of
several Senators to meet with Trump in Washington, D.C. In the end,
Trump picked former congressman and Governor of Indiana Mike Pence to
join him on the Republican ticket.

Electoral history
=================

Personal life and family
========================

-   *Capito and the Moore Capito family are members of First
    Presbyterian Church in Charleston, WV, a congregation of the
    Presbyterian Church (USA).*

-   *Capito is married to Charles L. Capito, and they have three
    children: sons Charles and Moore, and daughter Shelley.*

Capito is married to Charles L. Capito, and they have three children:
sons Charles and Moore, and daughter Shelley. Her father served over two
years in prison on corruption charges. Her sister, Lucy Moore Durbin,
was arrested in 1992 along with her husband for selling cocaine to an
undercover officer. Capito and the Moore Capito family are members of
First Presbyterian Church in Charleston, WV, a congregation of the
Presbyterian Church (USA).

In September 2015, Runner's World featured Capito in its "I'm a Runner"
vlog, where she states she has been a distance runner for over 30 years.

See also
========

-   *Women in the United States Senate*

-   *Women in the United States House of Representatives*

Women in the United States House of Representatives

Women in the United States Senate

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Shelley Moore Capito for Senate*

-   *Shelley Moore Capito at Curlie*

-   *Senator Shelley Moore Capito official U.S. Senate site*

Senator Shelley Moore Capito official U.S. Senate site

Shelley Moore Capito for Senate

Shelley Moore Capito at Curlie

Appearances on C-SPAN

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress

Profile at Vote Smart

Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election
Commission

Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
