**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shorenstein%20Center%20on%20Media%2C%20Politics%20and%20Public%20Policy\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy
=======================================================

-   *Courses taught by Shorenstein Center professors are also an
    integral part of the Harvard Kennedy School's curriculum.*

-   *The Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy is a
    Harvard University research center that explores the intersection
    and impact of media, politics and public policy in theory and
    practice.*

The Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy is a Harvard
University research center that explores the intersection and impact of
media, politics and public policy in theory and practice.

Among other activities, the center organizes dozens of yearly events for
journalists, scholars and the public, many of which take place at the
John F. Kennedy Jr. Forum. Courses taught by Shorenstein Center
professors are also an integral part of the Harvard Kennedy School's
curriculum.

Since its founding in 1986, the center has also emerged as a source for
research on US campaigns, elections and journalism. The center hosts
visiting fellows each semester, who produce research on a broad range of
topics. Papers have included "Riptide: What Really Happened to the News
Business,"\
by John Huey, Martin Nisenholtz and Paul Sagan; "Did Twitter Kill the
Boys on the Bus?" by Peter Hamby of CNN and Snapchat; and "Digital Fuel
of the 21st Century," by Vivek Kundra, who was the first chief
information officer of the United States from March 2009 to August 2011
under President Barack Obama. In 2016, the center produced a series of
four reports analyzing media coverage of the 2016 US presidential
election, authored by Thomas E. Patterson, Bradlee Professor of
Government and the Press.

The Shorenstein Center also awards the annual Goldsmith Awards Program,
which includes the Goldsmith Prize for Investigative Reporting and the
Goldsmith Book Prize. Past winners have included James Risen and Eric
Lichtblau of The New York Times; Patricia Callahan, Sam Roe and Michael
Hawthorne of the Chicago Tribune; and Debbie Cenziper and Sarah Cohen of
The Washington Post. Other prizes and lectures given by the Shorenstein
Center include the David Nyhan Prize for Political Journalism, the T.H.
White Lecture on Press and Politics and the Richard S. Salant Lecture on
Freedom of the Press.

History
=======

-   *The John F. Kennedy School of Government has always recognized that
    engagement with the media should be part of the school's focus, and
    initially this role was fulfilled by the Harvard Institute of
    Politics (IOP).*

-   *In 1980 Moore drafted a proposal for a Harvard center on the press,
    politics and public policy.*

-   *The Shorenstein Center is one of the most active programs at the
    Harvard Kennedy School, and has hosted more than a thousand speakers
    since 1986.*

The John F. Kennedy School of Government has always recognized that
engagement with the media should be part of the school's focus, and
initially this role was fulfilled by the Harvard Institute of Politics
(IOP). In 1974 Jonathan Moore became the institute's director, and under
him the IOP sponsored conferences and invited journalists to Harvard as
fellows. In 1980 Moore drafted a proposal for a Harvard center on the
press, politics and public policy. Kennedy School dean Graham Allison
and Harvard president Derek Bok supported the concept, and an advisory
board and committee were formed. Those consulted included political
scientist Richard Neustadt; attorney and educator David Riesman;
journalists James C. Thomson Jr., David S. Broder, J. Anthony Lukas and
Dan Rather; newspaper executives Otis Chandler, Katharine Graham and
William O. Taylor II; researcher Stephen H. Hess; Foreign Affairs editor
James F. Hoge, Jr.; and television executive Frank Stanton . An
endowment fund was created by the IOP, and other donations came from the
Boston Globe, Cox Enterprises, Walter Cronkite and General Electric. In
all, these efforts raised \$5 million for professorships, programs and
fellowships.

In March 1985, Joan Shorenstein, a producer of the CBS Evening News with
Dan Rather, died of cancer at age 38. Her parents, Walter H. and Phyllis
J. Shorenstein, were interested in creating an initiative that would
honor their daughter's passion for journalism and politics, and spoke
with Edward M. Kennedy, Allison, Bok and Moore. The Shorensteins' gave
an initial gift of \$5 million, and the Joan Shorenstein Center on
Press, Politics and Public Policy officially opened in September 1986.
At the ceremony an address was given by Benjamin C. Bradlee, with
remarks by Senator Kennedy, Walter H. Shorenstein and others.

Two years after the Shorenstein Center's founding, veteran journalist
Marvin Kalb became its director. He worked to raise the center's
profile, and under his leadership the Theodore H. White Lecture on Press
and Politics was established, followed by the Goldsmith Prize for
Investigative Reporting. Kalb directed the center until 1999, and during
that time formalized its fellowship program; developed the introductory
course on press, politics and public policy; and expanded the Kennedy
School's curriculum.

On July 1, 2000, Pulitzer Prize–winning journalist Alex S. Jones was
named director of the Shorenstein Center. Since taking over, he has
enhanced the fellowship program, launched initiatives to increase
student engagement and broadened the advisory board. The Shorenstein
Center is one of the most active programs at the Harvard Kennedy School,
and has hosted more than a thousand speakers since 1986.

On April 25, 2016, the former Senior Vice President and Deputy Publisher
of the Los Angeles Times, Nicco Mele, was named the new director.

Shorenstein Center Fellows
==========================

-   *The Shorenstein Center traditionally hosts 5-6 fellows per
    semester.*

-   *They serve as mentors to students and hold study groups to share
    their experiences with the Harvard Kennedy School community more
    broadly.*

-   *These fellows are well-established practitioners in media, politics
    and public policy.*

The Shorenstein Center traditionally hosts 5-6 fellows per semester.
These fellows are well-established practitioners in media, politics and
public policy. They serve as mentors to students and hold study groups
to share their experiences with the Harvard Kennedy School community
more broadly. Each fellow produces a final research paper that
contributes to ideas and innovation in their respective areas of
expertise. The fall 2017 fellows are Donna Brazile, Tyler Bridges, Claes
H. de Vreese, Kathleen Hall Jamieson, Tom Wheeler and Wael Ghonim. Past
fellows have included Bob Schieffer, Richard Stengel and Judy Woodruff.

Combating Fake News
===================

-   *In February 2017, the Shorenstein Center hosted a conference on
    fake news, bringing together academics and practitioners to discuss
    solutions to the problem.*

-   *In September 2017, First Draft News, a non-profit that works on
    solutions to challenges with trust & truth in news, set up a home
    base at the Shorenstein Center.*

-   *This announcement is part of the Shorenstein Center's broader work
    and research in the area of combatting fake news.*

In September 2017, First Draft News, a non-profit that works on
solutions to challenges with trust & truth in news, set up a home base
at the Shorenstein Center. The network includes more than 100
organizations that help newsrooms & tech companies verify news. This
announcement is part of the Shorenstein Center's broader work and
research in the area of combatting fake news.

In February 2017, the Shorenstein Center hosted a conference on fake
news, bringing together academics and practitioners to discuss solutions
to the problem. The conference was co-sponsored by the Ash Center for
Democratic Governance and Innovation, as well as Northeastern
University.

Journalist's Resource
=====================

-   *Journalist’s Resource is a free reference web page based at the
    Shorenstein Center.*

Journalist’s Resource is a free reference web page based at the
Shorenstein Center. It makes leading media research and insights on
topical news items available to journalists, bloggers, students and
professors. Peer-reviewed research is central to its mandate and day to
day offerings. The resource has been recognized by the American Library
Association for the quality of work made available on the site.

Internship Program
==================

-   *In the summer of 2017, the Shorenstein Center sponsored 10 interns,
    placing them in premiere media & tech companies.*

In the summer of 2017, the Shorenstein Center sponsored 10 interns,
placing them in premiere media & tech companies. The interns were placed
in New York, Washington, DC, San Francisco, and Texas.

Relationship with the Media Professional Interest Council
=========================================================

-   *The Media Professional Interest Council is the graduate student arm
    of the Shorenstein Center.*

-   *The Council sets up media networking & mentorship opportunities for
    students, supports the Shorenstein Center's recruitment efforts for
    research & jobs, and helps the Shorenstein Center engage students.*

-   *The Media Professional Interest Council works closely with the
    Director of the Shorenstein Center.*

The Media Professional Interest Council is the graduate student arm of
the Shorenstein Center. Founded in 2016 by Matthew Spector, Neil Thomas
and Howard Cohen, the council's mission is to create opportunities for
Harvard graduate students interested in media, politics and public
policy. The Council sets up media networking & mentorship opportunities
for students, supports the Shorenstein Center's recruitment efforts for
research & jobs, and helps the Shorenstein Center engage students. The
council also helps the Shorenstein Center with several aspects of the
Goldsmith Awards and coordinates small seminars with the Shorenstein
Fellows and high profile guest speakers. The Media Professional Interest
Council works closely with the Director of the Shorenstein Center.

See also
========

-   *Walter Shorenstein*

-   *Douglas W. Shorenstein*

-   *Shorenstein Prize*

Hard Choices (Moore book)

Douglas W. Shorenstein

Shorenstein Prize

Walter Shorenstein

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy*

Shorenstein Center on Media, Politics and Public Policy

Journalist's Resource
