**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social%20Democrats%2C%20USA\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Social Democrats, USA
=====================

-   *SDUSA's electoral strategy ("realignment") intended to organize
    labor unions, civil rights organizations and other constituencies
    into a coalition that would transform the Democratic Party into a
    social democratic party.*

-   *Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA) is an American association of social
    democrats founded in 1972.*

-   *Replacing Socialist with Social Democrats, SDUSA clarified its
    vision to Americans who confused social democracy with Soviet
    Communism which SDUSA opposed.*

Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA) is an American association of social
democrats founded in 1972. The Socialist Party of America (SPA) had
stopped running independent candidates for President and consequently
the word Party in the SPA's name had confused the public. Replacing
Socialist with Social Democrats, SDUSA clarified its vision to Americans
who confused social democracy with Soviet Communism which SDUSA opposed.

In response, former SPA Co-Chairman Michael Harrington resigned from
SDUSA in 1973 and founded the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee
(DSOC), which criticized SDUSA's anti-communism and welcomed the New
Politics movement associated with George McGovern and the New Left.
SDUSA members opposed McGovern's politics and a few of them helped to
start the Coalition for a Democratic Majority (CDM) and such members
have been called "Scoop" Jackson Democrats or neoconservatives (or
both). SDUSA's members had been active in the civil rights movement,
which had been led since the 1940s by A. Philip Randolph. SDUSA's
leaders had organized the 1963 March on Washington, during which Martin
Luther King Jr. delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech. Under the
leadership of Randolph and Bayard Rustin, SDUSA championed Rustin's
emphasis on economic inequality as the most important issue facing
African Americans after the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and
the Voting Rights Act of 1965. SDUSA's efforts to reduce economic
inequality led to a focus on labor unions and economic policy and SDUSA
members were active in the AFL–CIO confederation as well as in
individual unions, especially the American Federation of Teachers (AFT).

SDUSA's electoral strategy ("realignment") intended to organize labor
unions, civil rights organizations and other constituencies into a
coalition that would transform the Democratic Party into a social
democratic party. The realignment strategy emphasized working with
unions and especially the AFL–CIO, putting an emphasis on economic
issues that would unite working class voters. SDUSA opposed the New
Politics of Senator McGovern, which had lost all states other than
Massachusetts to Richard Nixon at the 1972 presidential election, when
Americans voted for a Democratic House of Representatives in the House
elections. While SDUSA had endorsed McGovern, it had adopted resolutions
criticizing the New Politics for having made criticisms of labor unions
and working class Americans and for its advocacy of an immediate and
unconditional withdrawal from Vietnam.

SDUSA's organizational activities included sponsoring discussions and
issuing position papers—it was known mainly because of its members'
activities in other organizations. It included civil rights activists
and leaders of labor unions, such as Bayard Rustin, Norman Hill and Tom
Kahn of the AFL–CIO as well as Sandra Feldman and Rachelle Horowitz of
the AFT. Tom Kahn organized the AFL–CIO's support of Solidarity, an
independent labor union that challenged Communist Poland. Penn Kemble
and Carl Gershman cooperated with Republican and Democratic
administrations on democracy promotion, beginning with the Reagan
administration. Other members included the philosopher Sidney Hook.
SDUSA ceased operations in 2005 following the death of Penn Kemble. In
2008–2009, two small organizations emerged, each proclaiming itself to
be the successor to SDUSA.

SDUSA's politics were criticized by former SPA Chairman Michael
Harrington, who in 1972 announced that he favored an immediate pull-out
of American forces from Vietnam (without requiring any guarantees).
After losing all votes at the 1972 convention that changed the SPA to
SDUSA, Harrington resigned in 1973 and formed his Democratic Socialist
Organizing Committee (DSOC), which welcomed the New Politics and
middle-class leadership. The 1972 changing of the name of the SPA to
SDUSA and the 1973 formation of DSOC represented a split in the American
socialist movement. Some SDUSA members have been called "right-wing
social-democrats", a taunt according to Ben Wattenberg. These SDUSA
members supported Solidarity, with Kahn working for AFL–CIO and later
Gershman working for the National Endowment for Democracy (NED). Their
support of Solidarity was criticized by the Carter administration, the
Soviet Union and other supporters of détente. SDUSA members (like the
AFL–CIO and at Solidarity's request) supported using economic aid to
Poland's Communist government as a bargaining chip to help Solidarity
while neoconservatives and "hard-line" conservatives opposed such aid in
1981. SDUSA leaders Penn Kemble and Bayard Rustin and former SDUSA
member Joshua Muravchik were called "second-generation neoconservatives"
by Justin Vaïsse. Along with Kahn, Horowitz and Gersham, these leaders
are also regarded as Shachtmanites by most other scholars. SDUSA leader
Penn Kemble rejected the neoconservative label and called himself a
social democrat (even while dying in 2005). Joshua Muravchik disputed
the Shachtmanite label for his generation and has called himself a
neoconservative, much to the disappointment of his SDUSA associates who
continue to identify with social democracy and to disagree with
neoconservatism.

Socialist Party of America
==========================

-   *According to Rustin, SDUSA aimed to transform the Democratic Party
    into a social democratic party.*

-   *The party changed its name to Social Democrats, USA by a vote of 73
    to 34.*

-   *Many members of the Debs Caucus resigned from SDUSA and some of
    them formed the Socialist Party USA.*

-   *The name "Socialist" was replaced by "Social Democrats" because
    many American associated the word "socialism" with Soviet
    Communism.*

By the early 1970s, the Socialist Party of America (SPA) was publicly
associated with A. Philip Randolph, the civil rights and labor union
leader; and with Michael Harrington, the author of The Other America.
Even before the 1972 convention, Harrington had resigned as an Honorary
Chairperson of the SPA "because he was upset about the group’s failure
to enthusiastically support George McGovern and because of its views on
the Vietnam War".

In its 1972 Convention, the SPA had two Co-Chairmen, Bayard Rustin and
Charles S. Zimmerman of the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union
(ILGWU); and a First National Vice Chairman, James S. Glaser, who were
re-elected by acclamation. In his opening speech to the Convention,
Co-Chairman Bayard Rustin called for SDUSA to organize against the
"reactionary policies of the Nixon Administration" and Rustin also
criticized the "irresponsibility and élitism of the 'New Politics'
liberals".

The party changed its name to Social Democrats, USA by a vote of 73 to
34. Changing the name of the Socialist Party of America to Social
Democrats, USA was intended to be "realistic" as the intention was to
respond to the end of the running of actual SPA candidates for office
and to respond to the confusions of Americans. The New York Times
observed that the Socialist Party had last sponsored Darlington Hoopes
as candidate for President in 1956 and who received only 2,121 votes,
which were cast in only six states. Because the SPA no longer sponsored
party candidates in elections, continued use of the name "party" was
"misleading" and hindered the recruiting of activists who participated
in the Democratic Party according to the majority report. The name
"Socialist" was replaced by "Social Democrats" because many American
associated the word "socialism" with Soviet Communism. Moreover, the
organization sought to distinguish itself from two small Marxist
parties, the Socialist Workers Party and the Socialist Labor Party.

During the 1972 Convention, the majority (Unity Caucus) won every vote
by a ratio of two to one. The Convention elected a national committee of
33 members, with 22 seats for the majority caucus, eight seats for the
Coalition Caucus of Harrington, two for the left-wing Debs Caucus and
one for the independent Samuel H. Friedman. Friedman and the minority
caucuses had opposed the name change.

The convention voted on and adopted proposals for its program by a
two-one vote. On foreign policy, the program called for "firmness toward
Communist aggression". However, on the Vietnam War the program opposed
"any efforts to bomb Hanoi into submission" and instead it endorsed
negotiating a peace agreement, which should protect communist political
cadres in South Vietnam from further military or police reprisals.
Harrington's proposal for a ceasefire and immediate withdrawal of
American forces was defeated. Harrington complained that after its
convention the SPA had endorsed George McGovern only with a statement
loaded with "constructive criticism" and that it had not mobilized
enough support for McGovern. The majority caucus's Arch Puddington
replied that the California branch was especially active in supporting
McGovern while the New York branch were focusing on a congressional
race.

When the SPA changed its name to SDUSA, Bayard Rustin became its public
spokesman. According to Rustin, SDUSA aimed to transform the Democratic
Party into a social democratic party. A strategy of re-alignment was
particularly associated with Max Shachtman.

Some months after the convention, Harrington resigned his membership in
SDUSA and he and some of his supporters from the Coalition Caucus soon
formed the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC). Many
members of the Debs Caucus resigned from SDUSA and some of them formed
the Socialist Party USA. The changing of the name of the SPA to SDUSA
and the 1973 formation of DSOC and the SPUSA represented a split in the
American socialist movement.

![](media/image1.png){width="5.5in" height="3.4021741032370953in"}\
*\
\
\
In the 1972 Congressional election, the majority of Americans voted for
Democratic Congressmen and this map shows the House seats by party
holding plurality in state\
\
  80.1–100% Republican\
  80.1–100% Democratic\
\
  60.1–80% Republican\
  60.1–80% Democratic\
\
  up to 60% Republican\
  up to 60% Democratic\
*

Early years
===========

-   *In domestic politics, the SDUSA leadership emphasized the role of
    the American labor movement in advancing civil rights and economic
    justice.*

-   *SDUSA members stated concerns about an exaggerated role of
    middle-class peace activists in the Democratic Party, particularly
    associated with the "New Politics" of Senator George McGovern, whose
    presidential candidacy was viewed as an ongoing disaster for the
    Democratic Party and for the United States.*

-   *In electoral politics, SDUSA aimed to transform the Democratic
    Party into a social democratic party.*

In domestic politics, the SDUSA leadership emphasized the role of the
American labor movement in advancing civil rights and economic justice.
The domestic program followed the recommendations of Rustin's article
"From Protest to Politics" in which Rustin analyzed the changing economy
and its implications for African Americans. Rustin wrote that the rise
of automation would reduce the demand for low-skill high-paying jobs,
which would jeopardize the position of the urban black working class,
particularly in the Northern United States. The needs of the black
community demanded a shift in political strategy, where blacks would
need to strengthen their political alliance with mostly white unions and
other organizations (churches, synagogues and the like) to pursue a
common economic agenda. It was time to move from protest to politics,
wrote Rustin. A particular danger facing the black community was the
chimera of identity politics, particularly the rise of "Black Power"
which Rustin dismissed as a fantasy of middle-class African-Americans
that repeated the political and moral errors of previous black
nationalists, while alienating the white allies needed by the black
community.

SDUSA documents had similar criticisms of the agendas advanced by middle
class activists increasing their role in the Democratic Party. SDUSA
members stated concerns about an exaggerated role of middle-class peace
activists in the Democratic Party, particularly associated with the "New
Politics" of Senator George McGovern, whose presidential candidacy was
viewed as an ongoing disaster for the Democratic Party and for the
United States. In electoral politics, SDUSA aimed to transform the
Democratic Party into a social democratic party.

In foreign policy, most of the founding SDUSA leadership called for an
immediate cessation of the bombing of North Vietnam. They demanded a
negotiated peace treaty to end the Vietnam War, but the majority opposed
a unilateral withdrawal of American forces from Vietnam, suggesting that
such a withdrawal would lead to an annihilation of the free labor unions
and of the political opposition. After the withdrawal of American forces
from Vietnam and the victory of the Vietnamese Communists, SDUSA
supported humanitarian assistance to refugees and condemned Senator
McGovern for his failure to support such assistance.

![](media/image2.jpg){width="4.671333114610674in" height="5.5in"}\
*National Chairman Bayard Rustin, who headed SDUSA*

Organizational activities
=========================

-   *From 1979–1989, SDUSA members were organized to support of
    Solidarity, the independent labor union of Poland.*

-   *SDUSA dues were paid annually in advance, with members receiving a
    copy of the organization's official organ, the tabloid-sized
    newspaper New America.*

-   *Freedman previously had served as organizer and chair of SDUSA's
    key New York local.*

SDUSA was governed by biannual conventions which invited the
participation of interested observers. These gatherings featured
discussions and debates over proposed resolutions, some of which were
adopted as organizational statements. The group frequently made use of
outside speakers at these events: non-SDUSA intellectuals ranged from
neoconservatives like Jeane Kirkpatrick on the right to democratic
socialists like Paul Berman on the left and similarly a range of
academic, political and labor-union leaders were invited. These meetings
also functioned as reunions for political activists and intellectuals,
some of whom worked together for decades. SDUSA also published a
newsletter and occasional position papers, issued statements supporting
labor unions and workers' interests at home and overseas, the existence
of Israel and the Israeli labor movement. From 1979–1989, SDUSA members
were organized to support of Solidarity, the independent labor union of
Poland.

The organization also attempted to exert influence through endorsements
of presidential candidates. The group's 1976 National Convention, held
in New York City, formally endorsed the Democratic ticket of Jimmy
Carter and Walter Mondale and pledged the group to "work
enthusiastically" for the election of the pair in November. The
organization took a less assertive approach during the divisive 1980
campaign, marked as it was by a heated primary challenge to President
Carter by Senator Edward Kennedy and SDUSA chose not to hold its
biannual convention until after the termination of the fall campaign.
The election of conservative Ronald Reagan was chalked up to the failure
of the Democrats to "appeal to their traditional working class
constituency".

Early in 1980, long-time National Director Carl Gershman resigned his
position to be replaced by Rita Freedman. Freedman previously had served
as organizer and chair of SDUSA's key New York local.

SDUSA dues were paid annually in advance, with members receiving a copy
of the organization's official organ, the tabloid-sized newspaper New
America. The dues rate was \$25 per year in 1983.

Member activities
=================

-   *A. Philip Randolph, Bayard Rustin and Norman Hill were leaders of
    the civil rights movement.*

-   *After 1960, the party also functioned "as an educational
    organization" and "a caucus of policy advocates on the left wing of
    the Democratic Party".*

-   *Similarly, SDUSA was known mainly because of the activities of its
    members, many of whom publicly identified themselves as members of
    SDUSA.*

Small organizations associated with the Debs–Thomas Socialist Party have
served as schools for the leadership of social-movement organizations,
including the civil rights movement and the sixties radicalism. These
organizations are now chiefly remembered because of their members'
leadership of large organizations that directly influenced the United
States and international politics. After 1960, the party also functioned
"as an educational organization" and "a caucus of policy advocates on
the left wing of the Democratic Party". Similarly, SDUSA was known
mainly because of the activities of its members, many of whom publicly
identified themselves as members of SDUSA. Members of SDUSA have served
as officers for governmental, private and not-for-profit organizations.
A. Philip Randolph, Bayard Rustin and Norman Hill were leaders of the
civil rights movement. Tom Kahn, Sandra Feldman and Rachelle Horowitz
were officers of labor unions. Carl Gershman and Penn Kemble served in
governmental and non-governmental organizations, particularly in foreign
policy. Philosopher Sidney Hook was a public intellectual. Writing after
the death of Tom Kahn, Ben Wattenberg commented that SDUSA as an
"umbrella organization" associated with other letterhead organizations,
saying the following:

![](media/image3.jpg){width="4.1066666666666665in" height="5.5in"}\
*A. Philip Randolph was a visible member of Norman Thomas' Socialist
Party of America and then of SDUSA*

A. Philip Randolph
==================

-   *Along with ILGWU President David Dubinsky, Randolph was honored at
    the 1976 SDUSA convention.*

-   *He remained with the organization when it changed its name to
    SDUSA.*

-   *The long-time leader and intellectual architect of the civil rights
    movement, A. Philip Randolph was also a visible member of the
    Socialist Party of Norman Thomas.*

The long-time leader and intellectual architect of the civil rights
movement, A. Philip Randolph was also a visible member of the Socialist
Party of Norman Thomas. He remained with the organization when it
changed its name to SDUSA. Along with ILGWU President David Dubinsky,
Randolph was honored at the 1976 SDUSA convention.

A. Philip Randolph came to national attention as the leader of the
Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Randolph proposed a march on
Washington, D.C. to protest racial discrimination in the United States
armed forces. Meeting with President Franklin D. Roosevelt in the Oval
Office, Randolph respectfully, politely, but firmly told President
Roosevelt that blacks would march in the capital unless desegregation
would occur. The planned march was canceled after President Roosevelt
issued Executive Order 8802 (the Fair Employment Act), which banned
discrimination in defense industries and federal agencies.

In 1942, an estimated 18,000 blacks gathered at Madison Square Garden to
hear Randolph kick off a campaign against discrimination in the
military, in war industries, in government agencies and in labor
unions. Following the act, during the Philadelphia Transit Strike of
1944 the government backed African American workers' striking to gain
positions formerly limited to white employees.

In 1947, Randolph, along with colleague Grant Reynolds, renewed efforts
to end discrimination in the armed services, forming the Committee
Against Jim Crow in Military Service, later renamed the League for
Non-Violent Civil Disobedience.  On July 26, 1948, President Harry S.
Truman abolished racial segregation in the armed forces through
Executive Order 9981. Randolph was the nominal leader of the March on
Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which was organized by Bayard Rustin
and his younger associates. At this march, Martin Luther King Jr.
delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech. Soon afterwards, the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 was passed.

![](media/image4.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.222108486439195in"}\
*Rustin in 1965*

Bayard Rustin
=============

-   *Rustin and Randolph organized the March on Washington for Jobs and
    Freedom in 1963.*

-   *Bayard Rustin was National Chairman of SDUSA and also was President
    of the A. Philip Randolph Institute.*

-   *Rustin convinced King to abandon the armed protection.*

-   *Rustin had had a long association with A. Philip Randolph and with
    pacifist movements.*

Bayard Rustin was National Chairman of SDUSA and also was President of
the A. Philip Randolph Institute.

Rustin had had a long association with A. Philip Randolph and with
pacifist movements. In 1956, Rustin advised Martin Luther King Jr. who
was organizing the Montgomery bus boycott. According to Rustin: "I think
it's fair to say that Dr. King's view of non-violent tactics was almost
non-existent when the boycott began. In other words, Dr. King was
permitting himself and his children and his home to be protected by
guns". Rustin convinced King to abandon the armed protection. The
following year, Rustin and King began organizing the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference (SCLC).

Rustin and Randolph organized the March on Washington for Jobs and
Freedom in 1963. On September 6, 1963, Rustin and Randolph appeared on
the cover of Life magazine as "the leaders" of the March.

From protest to politics
========================

-   *After passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act
    of 1965, Rustin advocated closer ties between the civil rights
    movement and the Democratic Party and its base among the working
    class.*

-   *As its agenda shifted from civil rights to economic justice, the
    black community's tactics needed to shift from protest to politics,
    wrote Rustin.*

After passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of
1965, Rustin advocated closer ties between the civil rights movement and
the Democratic Party and its base among the working class.

With the assistance of Tom Kahn, Rustin wrote the 1965 article "From
protest to politics", which analyzed the changing economy and its
implications for black Americans. This article stated that the rise of
automation would reduce the demand for low-skill high-paying jobs, which
would jeopardize the position of the urban black working class,
particularly in the Northern United States. To pursue its economic
agenda, the black community needed to shift political strategy,
strengthening its political alliance with mostly white unions and other
organizations (churches, synagogues and the like). As its agenda shifted
from civil rights to economic justice, the black community's tactics
needed to shift from protest to politics, wrote Rustin. A particular
danger facing the Negro community was the chimera of identity politics,
particularly the rise of "Black Power", for which Rustin expressed
contempt:

Rustin wrote that "Black Power" repeated the moral errors of previous
black nationalists while alienating the white allies needed by the black
community.

Influence on William Julius Wilson
==================================

-   *Wilson has served on the advisory board of Social Democrats, USA.*

Rustin's analysis was supported by the later research by William Julius
Wilson. Wilson documented an increase in inequality within the black
community, following educated blacks moving into white suburbs and
following the decrease of demand for low-skill labor as industry
declined in the Northern United States. Such economic problems were not
being addressed by a civil rights leadership focused on "affirmative
action", a policy benefiting the truly advantaged within the black
community. Wilson's criticism of the neglect of working class and poor
African Americans by civil rights organizations led to his being
mistaken for a conservative, despite his having identified himself as a
Rustin-style social democrat. Wilson has served on the advisory board of
Social Democrats, USA.

Labor movement, trade unions and social democracy
=================================================

-   *He was a founding National Co-Chairman of Social Democrats, USA.*

-   *He contributed to the labor movement's two sides, economic and
    political, through support of labor unions and social democratic
    politics.*

-   *On the political side of the labor movement, Rustin increased his
    visibility as a leader of the American social democracy.*

Rustin increasingly worked to strengthen the labor movement, which he
saw as the champion of empowerment for the African American community
and for economic justice for all Americans. He contributed to the labor
movement's two sides, economic and political, through support of labor
unions and social democratic politics.

He was the founder and became the Director of the A. Philip Randolph
Institute, which coordinated the AFL–CIO's work on civil rights and
economic justice. He became a regular columnist for the AFL–CIO
newspaper.

On the political side of the labor movement, Rustin increased his
visibility as a leader of the American social democracy. He was a
founding National Co-Chairman of Social Democrats, USA.

Human rights and ending discrimination against gays
===================================================

-   *He also testified on behalf of New York State's Gay Rights Bill.*

Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Rustin worked as a human rights and
election monitor for Freedom House. He also testified on behalf of New
York State's Gay Rights Bill. In 1986, he gave the speech "The new
'niggers' are gays" in which he asserted: .mw-parser-output
.templatequote{overflow:hidden;margin:1em 0;padding:0
40px}.mw-parser-output .templatequote
.templatequotecite{line-height:1.5em;text-align:left;padding-left:1.6em;margin-top:0}

Rustin also helped to write a report on peaceful means to end apartheid
(racial segregation) in South Africa.

Norman Hill
===========

-   *Norman Hill is an influential African American administrator,
    activist and labor leader..*

-   *Joining the civil rights movement and working in Chicago, Hill was
    an organizer for the Youth March for Integrated Schools and then
    Secretary of Chicago Area Negro American Labor Council and Staff
    Chairman of the Chicago March Conventions.*

Norman Hill is an influential African American administrator, activist
and labor leader..

Graduating in 1956, he was one of the first African Americans to
graduate from Haverford College. Joining the civil rights movement and
working in Chicago, Hill was an organizer for the Youth March for
Integrated Schools and then Secretary of Chicago Area Negro American
Labor Council and Staff Chairman of the Chicago March Conventions. In
the Congress of Racial Equality (CORE), Hill was first the East Coast
Field Secretary and then National Program Director. He assisted Bayard
Rustin with organizing the 1963 March on Washington. As National Program
Director of CORE, Hill coordinated the route 40 desegregation of
restaurants, the Waldorf campaign, and illustrated the civil rights
demonstration that took place at the 1964 Republican National
Convention.

From 1964 to 1967, Norman Hill served as the Legislative Representative
and Civil Rights Liaison of the Industrial Union department of the
AFL–CIO. He was involved in the issue of raising minimum wage and the
labor delegation on the Selma to Montgomery marches against racial
discrimination in politics and voting in the Southern United States.

In 1967, Hill became active in the A. Philip Randolph Institute. Hill
began as Associate Director, but he later became Executive Director and
finally President. As Associate Director, Hill coordinated and organized
the Memphis March in 1968 after Martin Luther King’s assassination. In
his career at the A. Philip Randolph Institute, Hill created over two
hundred local chapters of this organization across the United States.

Tom Kahn
========

-   *Tom Kahn was a leader of SDUSA, who made notable contributions to
    the civil rights movement and to the labor movement.*

Tom Kahn was a leader of SDUSA, who made notable contributions to the
civil rights movement and to the labor movement.

Civil rights
============

-   *Kahn helped Rustin organize the 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage to
    Washington and the 1958 and 1959 Youth March for Integrated
    Schools.*

-   *Kahn's role in the civil rights movement was discussed in the
    eulogy by Rachelle Horowitz.*

Kahn helped Rustin organize the 1957 Prayer Pilgrimage to Washington and
the 1958 and 1959 Youth March for Integrated Schools. As a white student
at historically black Howard University, Kahn and Norman Hill helped
Rustin and A. Philip Randolph to plan the 1963 March on Washington, at
which Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech.
Kahn's role in the civil rights movement was discussed in the eulogy by
Rachelle Horowitz.

Support of Solidarity
=====================

-   *The trade union Solidarity (Solidarność) began in 1980.*

-   *Kahn was deeply involved with supporting the Polish labor
    movement.*

-   *Lane Kirkland appointed Kahn to organize the AFL–CIO's support of
    Solidarity.*

-   *\
    \
    The AFL–CIO sought approval in advance from Solidarity's leadership
    to avoid jeopardizing their position with unwanted or surprising
    American help.*

When he became an assistant to the President of the AFL–CIO from
1972–1986, Kahn developed an expertise in international affairs.

Kahn was deeply involved with supporting the Polish labor movement. The
trade union Solidarity (Solidarność) began in 1980. The Soviet-backed
communist regime headed by General Wojciech Jaruzelski declared martial
law in December 1981. Lane Kirkland appointed Kahn to organize the
AFL–CIO's support of Solidarity. Politically, the AFL–CIO supported the
twenty-one demands of the Gdansk workers by lobbying to stop further
U.S. loans to Poland unless those demands were met. Materially, the
AFL–CIO established the Polish Workers Aid Fund, which raised almost
\$300,000 by 1981. These funds purchased printing presses and office
supplies. The AFL–CIO donated typewriters, duplicating machines, a
minibus, an offset press and other supplies requested by Solidarity.

The AFL–CIO sought approval in advance from Solidarity's leadership to
avoid jeopardizing their position with unwanted or surprising American
help. On September 12, Lech Walesa welcomed international donations with
this statement: "Help can never be politically embarrassing. That of the
AFL–CIO, for example. We are grateful to them. It was a very good thing
that they helped us. Whenever we can, we will help them, too". Kahn
explained the AFL–CIO position in a 1981 debate:

In testimony to the Joint Congressional Commission on Security and
Cooperation in Europe, Kahn suggested policies to support the Polish
people, in particular by supporting Solidarity's demand that the
communist regime finally establish legality, by respecting the
twenty-one rights guaranteed by the Polish constitution.

The AFL–CIO provided the most aid to Solidarity, but substantial
additional aid was provided by Western-European labor unions, including
the United Kingdom's Trades Union Congress and especially the Swedish
Trade Union Confederation.

Criticism of AFL–CIO
====================

-   *Its support worried the Carter administration, whose Secretary of
    State Edmund Muskie told Kirkland that the AFL–CIO's continued
    support of Solidarity could trigger a Soviet invasion of Poland.*

-   *After Kirkland refused to withdraw support to Solidarity, Muskie
    met with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobyrnin,to clarify that the
    AFL–CIO's aid did not have the support of the United States
    government.*

The AFL–CIO's support enraged the Communist regimes of Eastern Europe
and the Soviet Union. Its support worried the Carter administration,
whose Secretary of State Edmund Muskie told Kirkland that the AFL–CIO's
continued support of Solidarity could trigger a Soviet invasion of
Poland. After Kirkland refused to withdraw support to Solidarity, Muskie
met with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobyrnin,to clarify that the
AFL–CIO's aid did not have the support of the United States government.

Aid through the 1980s
=====================

-   *In both 1988 and 1989, the Congress allocated \$1 million yearly to
    Solidarity via the AFL–CIO.*

-   *In total, the AFL–CIO channeled 4 million dollars to Solidarity.*

-   *Later, the National Endowment for Democracy provided \$1.7 million
    for Solidarity, which was transferred via the AFL–CIO.*

Later, the National Endowment for Democracy provided \$1.7 million for
Solidarity, which was transferred via the AFL–CIO. In both 1988 and
1989, the Congress allocated \$1 million yearly to Solidarity via the
AFL–CIO. In total, the AFL–CIO channeled 4 million dollars to
Solidarity.

Sandra Feldman
==============

-   *Sandra Feldman was an American civil rights activist, educator and
    labor leader who served as president of the American Federation of
    Teachers (AFT) from 1997 to 2004.*

-   *On January 22, 1999, she helped to organize and was the keynote
    speaker at the SDUSA workshop on "American Labor in the New Economy:
    A Day of Dialogue".*

Sandra Feldman was an American civil rights activist, educator and labor
leader who served as president of the American Federation of Teachers
(AFT) from 1997 to 2004. On January 22, 1999, she helped to organize and
was the keynote speaker at the SDUSA workshop on "American Labor in the
New Economy: A Day of Dialogue".

Socialist activism
==================

-   *During her early years in the civil rights movement, Feldman worked
    to integrate Howard Johnson's restaurants in Maryland.*

-   *She became active in socialist politics and the civil rights
    movement.*

-   *When she was 17 years old, she met civil rights activist Bayard
    Rustin, who became her mentor and close friend.*

She became active in socialist politics and the civil rights movement.
When she was 17 years old, she met civil rights activist Bayard Rustin,
who became her mentor and close friend. During her early years in the
civil rights movement, Feldman worked to integrate Howard Johnson's
restaurants in Maryland. She soon became employment committee chairwoman
of the Congress of Racial Equality in Harlem. She also participated in
several Freedom Rides and was arrested twice.

Teaching
========

-   *From 1963 to 1966, Feldman matriculated in a master's degree
    program in literature at New York University.*

-   *When New York City teachers won collective bargaining rights in
    1960, she organized the entire school staff within a year.*

-   *While in graduate school, Feldman worked as a fourth-grade teacher
    at Public School 34 on the New York City's Lower East Side.*

Upon graduation from Brooklyn College in 1962, Feldman worked for six
months as a substitute third-grade teacher in East Harlem. She continued
to be active in the civil rights movement, working to desegregate Howard
Johnson restaurants in Maryland. She participated in the 1963 March on
Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which was organized by Rustin and his
associates. From 1963 to 1966, Feldman matriculated in a master's degree
program in literature at New York University. While in graduate school,
Feldman worked as a fourth-grade teacher at Public School 34 on the New
York City's Lower East Side. She immediately joined the American
Federation of Teachers, which had only one other member at the school.
When New York City teachers won collective bargaining rights in 1960,
she organized the entire school staff within a year. During this time,
Feldman became an associate of Albert Shanker, then an organizer for the
United Federation of Teachers.

United Federation of Teachers
=============================

-   *In 1966, Shanker—now executive director of the UFT—hired Feldman as
    a full-time field representative on the recommendation of Rustin.*

-   *The city of New York had designated the Ocean Hill-Brownsville area
    of Brooklyn as one of three decentralized school districts in an
    effort to give the minority community more say in school affairs.*

In 1966, Shanker—now executive director of the UFT—hired Feldman as a
full-time field representative on the recommendation of Rustin. Over the
next nine years, Feldman became the union's executive director and
oversaw its staff. She was elected its secretary (the second-most
powerful position in the local) in 1983.

After just two years on the UFT staff, Feldman played a crucial role in
the Ocean Hill-Brownsville strike. The city of New York had designated
the Ocean Hill-Brownsville area of Brooklyn as one of three
decentralized school districts in an effort to give the minority
community more say in school affairs. The crisis began when the Ocean
Hill-Brownsville governing board fired 13 teachers for allegedly
sabotaging the decentralization experiment. Shanker demanded that
specific charges be filed and the teachers given a chance to defend
themselves in due process proceedings.

A protracted fight erupted between those in the community who supported
the Ocean Hill-Brownsville board and those supported the UFT. Many
supporters of the local school board resorted to racial invective.
Shanker was branded a racist, and many African-Americans accused the UFT
of being "Jewish-dominated". Feldman was often at the center of the
strike. The UFT emerged from the crisis more powerful than ever and
Feldman's hard work, good political judgment and calm demeanor won her
widespread praise within the union. Shanker was elected president of the
AFT in 1974, but he retained his post as UFT President. In 1986, Shanker
retired as UFT President and Feldman was elected president.

UFT President after Shanker
===========================

-   *She was instrumental in helping David Dinkins win election as mayor
    of New York in 1989 by using union members and resources to build a
    winning electoral coalition of black and white voters.*

-   *She lobbied so fiercely for Bernard Gifford as New York City
    schools chancellor that Robert F. Wagner Jr., President of the New
    York City Board of Education, threatened to resign unless Feldman
    backed off and he was given a free hand.*

Feldman was known for being a quiet yet very effective leader of the
UFT. She fought school system chancellors and mayors both, winning
significantly higher wages and benefits as well as improved working
conditions for her members. She lobbied so fiercely for Bernard Gifford
as New York City schools chancellor that Robert F. Wagner Jr., President
of the New York City Board of Education, threatened to resign unless
Feldman backed off and he was given a free hand.

She was instrumental in helping David Dinkins win election as mayor of
New York in 1989 by using union members and resources to build a winning
electoral coalition of black and white voters. However, once mayor
Dinkins stalled on signing a new contract with the teachers' union and
Feldman rarely criticized Dinkins publicly for his actions, but she kept
the UFT out of Dinkins' 1993 re-election. Dinkins lost in a tight race
to Rudy Giuliani.

American Federation of Teachers
===============================

-   *She also renewed the union's focus on organizing: During her
    tenure, the AFT grew by more than 160,000 new members (about 17
    percent).*

-   *With Feldman as President, in 2002 AFT delegates approved a
    four-point plan: 1) building a "culture of organizing" throughout
    the union, 2) enhancing the union's political advocacy efforts, 3)
    engaging in a series of publicity, legislative, funding and
    political campaigns to strengthen the institutions in which AFT
    members work; and 4) recommitting the AFT to fostering democratic
    education and human rights at home and abroad.*

Feldman had been elected an AFT vice president in 1974, serving on the
national union's executive council and the executive council's executive
committee.

After Shanker died in February 1997, Feldman won election as the AFT
President in July 1998, becoming the union's first female president
since 1930. Feldman re-emphasized the AFT's commitment to educational
issues. She also renewed the union's focus on organizing: During her
tenure, the AFT grew by more than 160,000 new members (about 17
percent). With Feldman as President, in 2002 AFT delegates approved a
four-point plan: 1) building a "culture of organizing" throughout the
union, 2) enhancing the union's political advocacy efforts, 3) engaging
in a series of publicity, legislative, funding and political campaigns
to strengthen the institutions in which AFT members work; and 4)
recommitting the AFT to fostering democratic education and human rights
at home and abroad. Feldman moved quickly to ensure that the plan was
implemented.

In May 1997, Feldman was elected to the AFL–CIO executive council and
appointed to the executive council's executive committee. During her
tenure at the head of the AFT, Feldman also served as a vice president
of Education International and was a board member of the International
Rescue Committee and Freedom House.

Feldman died in 2005 at the age 65.

Sidney Hook
===========

-   *A pragmatic social democrat, Hook sometimes cooperated with
    conservatives, particularly in opposing communism.*

-   *Hook gave the keynote speech to the July 17–18, 1976 convention of
    SDUSA.*

-   *After World War II, he argued that members of conspiracies, like
    the Communist Party USA and other Leninist conspiracies, ethically
    could be barred from holding offices of public trust.*

Sidney Hook was an American pragmatic philosopher known for his
contributions to public debates. A student of John Dewey, Hook continued
to examine the philosophy of history, of education, politics and of
ethics. He was known for his criticisms of totalitarianism and fascism.
A pragmatic social democrat, Hook sometimes cooperated with
conservatives, particularly in opposing communism. After World War II,
he argued that members of conspiracies, like the Communist Party USA and
other Leninist conspiracies, ethically could be barred from holding
offices of public trust. Hook gave the keynote speech to the July 17–18,
1976 convention of SDUSA.

Penn Kemble
===========

-   *He supported free labor-unions and democracy in the United States
    and internationally and so was active in the civil rights movement,
    the labor movement and the social democratic opposition to
    communism.*

-   *He worked at The New York Times, but was fired for refusing to
    cross a picket line during a typesetters' strike.*

Penn Kemble was an American political activist and a founding member of
SDUSA. He supported free labor-unions and democracy in the United States
and internationally and so was active in the civil rights movement, the
labor movement and the social democratic opposition to communism. He
founded organizations including Negotiations Now!, Frontlash and
Prodemca. Kemble was appointed to various government boards and
institutions throughout the 1990s, eventually becoming the Acting
Director of the U.S. Information Agency under President Bill Clinton.
After moving to New York, Kemble stood out as a neatly dressed, muscular
Protestant youth in an urban political setting that was predominantly
Catholic and Jewish. He worked at The New York Times, but was fired for
refusing to cross a picket line during a typesetters' strike. A leader
in the East River chapter of the Congress of Racial Equality, Kemble
helped to organize a non-violent blockade of the Triborough Bridge
during rush hour to raise consciousness among suburbanites of the lives
of Harlem residents. Kemble was a founder of Negotiation Now!, a group
which called for an end to the bombing of North Vietnam and a negotiated
settlement of the Vietnam War. He was opposed to a unilateral withdrawal
of American forces from Vietnam.

In 1972, Kemble was a founder the Coalition for a Democratic Majority
(CDM), an association of centrist Democrats that opposed the "new
politics" liberalism exemplified by Senator George McGovern, who
suffered the worst defeat of a presidential candidate in modern times,
despite the widespread dislike of Nixon. Kemble was Executive Director
of CDM from 1972–1976, at which time he left to become a special
assistant and speechwriter for Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan. He
remained with Moynihan until 1979. Concerned about the direct and
indirect role of the Communist Party USA and of sympathizers of
Marxist–Leninist politics in the American peace movement and in the
National Council of Churches, Kemble helped found the Institute on
Religion and Democracy. From 1981 until 1988, Kemble was the President
of the Committee for Democracy in Central America (PRODEMCA), which
opposed the Sandinistas and related groups in Central America.

Kemble supported the Bill Clinton's campaign for the presidency. During
the Presidency of Bill Clinton, he served first in 1993 as the Deputy
Director and then in 1999 as Acting Director of the United States
Information Agency. He was also made a special representative of
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright to the Community of Democracies
Initiative.

In 2001, Kemble was appointed to the International Broadcasting Bureau
by President George W. Bush. Kemble also became the Washington, D.C.
representative of Freedom House and in his last years he was especially
involved in supporting peace efforts in the Middle East. Secretary of
State Colin L. Powell appointed Kemble to be the Chairman of the
International Eminent Persons Group on Slavery, Abduction and Forced
Servitude in Sudan. Despite being diagnosed with brain cancer, Kemble
spent his last months organizing a conference on the contributions of
Sidney Hook, the late pragmatic philosopher and SDUSA spokesperson; Carl
Gershman took over the leadership of the conference after Kemble's
cancer made it impossible for him to continue.

Carl Gershman
=============

-   *Carl Gershman was the Executive Director of the SDUSA from 1975
    to 1980.*

-   *After having served as the Representative to the United Nations
    Committee on human rights during the first Reagan administration,
    Carl Gershman has served as the President of the National Endowment
    for Democracy.*

Carl Gershman was the Executive Director of the SDUSA from 1975 to 1980.
After having served as the Representative to the United Nations
Committee on human rights during the first Reagan administration, Carl
Gershman has served as the President of the National Endowment for
Democracy. After the Polish people overthrew communism, their elected
government awarded the Order of the Knight's Cross to Carl Gershman and
posthumously the Order of the White Eagle to AFL–CIO President Lane
Kirkland.

Hiatus and re-foundation
========================

-   *Two additional conventions took place since the 2009 reformation,
    an internet teleconference on September 1, 2010 featuring
    presentations by guest speakers Herb Engstrom of the California
    Democratic Party Executive Committee and Roger Clayman, Executive
    Director of the Long Island Labor Federation; and a convention held
    August 26–27, 2012 in Buffalo, New York with a keynote address
    delivered by Richard Lipsitz, Executive Director of Western New York
    Labor Federation.*

-   *Owing to factional disagreements, a group based in Johnstown,
    Pennsylvania and the newly elected National Executive Committee
    parted company, with the former styling itself as the Social
    Democrats, USA – Socialist Party USA and the latter as Social
    Democrats, USA.*

Following the death of the organization's Notesonline editor Penn Kemble
of cancer on 15 October 2005, SDUSA lapsed into a state of
organizational hiatus, with no further issues of the online newsletter
produced or updates to the group's website made.

Following several years of inactivity, an attempt was subsequently made
to revive SDUSA. In 2008, a group composed initially mostly of
Pennsylvania members of SDUSA emerged, determined to re-launch the
organization. A re-founding convention of the SDUSA was held May 3,
2009, at which a National Executive Committee was elected.

Owing to factional disagreements, a group based in Johnstown,
Pennsylvania and the newly elected National Executive Committee parted
company, with the former styling itself as the Social Democrats, USA –
Socialist Party USA and the latter as Social Democrats, USA.

Two additional conventions took place since the 2009 reformation, an
internet teleconference on September 1, 2010 featuring presentations by
guest speakers Herb Engstrom of the California Democratic Party
Executive Committee and Roger Clayman, Executive Director of the Long
Island Labor Federation; and a convention held August 26–27, 2012 in
Buffalo, New York with a keynote address delivered by Richard Lipsitz,
Executive Director of Western New York Labor Federation.

Controversies
=============

Anti-Communism
==============

-   *Michael Harrington charged that its "obsessive anti-Communism"
    rendered SDUSA politically conservative.*

Michael Harrington charged that its "obsessive anti-Communism" rendered
SDUSA politically conservative. In contrast, Harrington's DSOC and DSA
criticized Communism, but he opposed many defense-and-diplomatic
policies against the Soviet Union and its Eastern Bloc. Harrington
voiced admiration for German Chancellor Willy Brandt's Ostpolitik, which
sought to reduce Western distrust of and hostility towards the Eastern
Bloc and so entice the Soviet Union reciprocally to reduce its
aggressive military posture.

Max Shachtman and alleged Trotskyism
====================================

-   *Decades later, conflicts in the AFL–CIO were roughly split inn 1995
    along the lines of the conflict between the "Shachtmanite Social
    Democrats and the Harringtonite Democratic Socialists of America,
    with the Social Democrats supporting Kirkland and Donahue and the
    Democratic Socialists supporting Sweeney".*

SDUSA leaders have served in the administrations of Presidents since the
1980 and the service of some members in Republican administrations has
been associated with controversy. SDUSA members like Gershman were
called "State Department socialists" by Massing (1987), who wrote that
the foreign policy of the Reagan administration was being run by
Trotskyists, a claim that was called a "myth" by Lipset (1988, p. 34).
This "Trotskyist" charge has been repeated and even widened by
journalist Michael Lind in 2003 to assert a takeover of the foreign
policy of the George W. Bush administration by former Trotskyists.
Lind's "amalgamation of the defense intellectuals with the traditions
and theories of "the largely Jewish-American Trotskyist movement \[in
Lind's words\]" was criticized in 2003 by University of Michigan
professor Alan M. Wald, who had discussed Trotskyism in his history of
"the New York intellectuals". SDUSA and allegations that "Trotskyists"
subverted Bush's foreign policy have been mentioned by "self-styled"
paleoconservatives (conservative opponents of neoconservatism).

Harrington and Tom Kahn had been associated with Max Shachtman, a
Marxist theorist who had broken with Leon Trotsky because of his
criticism of the Soviet Union as being a totalitarian class-society
after having supported Trotsky in the 1930s. Although Schachtman died in
1972 before the Socialist Party was renamed as SDUSA, Shachtman's ideas
continued to influence the Albert Shanker and The American Federation of
Teachers, which was often associated with SDUSA members. Decades later,
conflicts in the AFL–CIO were roughly split inn 1995 along the lines of
the conflict between the "Shachtmanite Social Democrats and the
Harringtonite Democratic Socialists of America, with the Social
Democrats supporting Kirkland and Donahue and the Democratic Socialists
supporting Sweeney".

Alleged conservatism or neoconservatism
=======================================

-   *SDUSA members supported Solidarity, the independent labor-union of
    Poland.*

-   *Some SDUSA members have been called right-wing social democrats, a
    taunt according to Wattenberg.*

-   *Some of SDUSA's former members have been called neoconservatives.*

Some SDUSA members have been called right-wing social democrats, a taunt
according to Wattenberg.

SDUSA members supported Solidarity, the independent labor-union of
Poland. The organizer of the AFL–CIO's support for Solidarity, SDUSA's
Tom Kahn, criticized Jeane Kirkpatrick's "Dictatorships and Double
Standards", arguing that democracy should be promoted even in the
countries dominated by Soviet Communism. In 1981, leading Social
Democrats and some moderate Republicans wanted to use economic aid to
Poland as leverage to expand the freedom of association in 1981, whereas
Caspar Weinberger and neoconservative Jeane Kirkpatrick preferred to
force the communist government of Poland to default on its international
payments so they would lose credibility. Kahn argued for his position in
a 1981 debate with neoconservative Norman Podhoretz, who like
Kirkpatrick and Weinberger opposed all credits. In 1982, Kirkpatrick
called similarly for Western assistance to Poland to be used to help
Solidarity.

Some of SDUSA's former members have been called neoconservatives. Justin
Vaisse listed five SDUSA associates as "second-generation
neoconservatives" and "so-called Shachtmanites", including "Penn Kemble,
Joshua Muravchik, \[...\] and Bayard Rustin". Throughout his life, Penn
Kemble called himself a social democrat and objected to being called a
neoconservative. Kemble and Joshua Muravchik were never followers of Max
Shachtman. On the contrary, Kemble was recruited by a non-Shachtmanite
professor, according to Muravchik, who wrote: "Although Shachtman was
one of the elder statesmen who occasionally made stirring speeches to
us, no YPSL \[Young People's Socialist League\] of my generation was a
Shachtmanite". Besides objecting to being called a "neoconservative",
Kemble "sharply criticized the Bush administration's approach on
\[Iraq\]. 'The distinction between liberation and democratization, which
requires a strategy and instruments, was an idea never understood by the
administration,' he told the New Republic", wrote The Washington Post in
Kemble's obituary.

Former member Joshua Muravchik
==============================

-   *When Muravhchik appeared at the 2003 SDUSA conference, he was
    criticized by SDUSA members:*

-   *Among Joshua Muravchick's SDUSA critics was his own father Emanuel
    Muravchik (a Norman Thomas socialist).*

Joshua Muravchik has identified himself as a neoconservative. When
Muravhchik appeared at the 2003 SDUSA conference, he was criticized by
SDUSA members:

Among Joshua Muravchick's SDUSA critics was his own father Emanuel
Muravchik (a Norman Thomas socialist). His mother was too upset with
Joshua's Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism to attend the
discussion. On the other hand, Joshua Muravchik was called a
"second-generation neoconservative" by Vaisse.

Conventions
===========

After reorganization
====================

Prominent members
=================

Notes
=====

References
==========

-   *The New Cold War History.*

-   *18 (1): 9–15.*

-   *18 (1): 16–21.*

-   *"How to support Solidarnosc: A debate ('Sponsored by the Committee
    for the Free World and the League for Industrial Democracy, with
    introduction by Midge Decter and moderation by Carl Gershman, and
    held at the Polish Institute for Arts and Sciences, New York City in
    March 1981')" (PDF).*

-   *144 (1): 31–35.*

-   *The New Republic: 18–22.*

Bernstein, Carl (February 24, 1992). "The holy alliance: Ronald Reagan
and John Paul II; How Reagan and the Pope conspired to assist Poland's
Solidarity movement and hasten the demise of Communism (Cover story)".
Time (U.S. ed.): 28–35.

Bloodworth, Jeffrey (2013). Losing the center: The decline of American
liberalism, 1968–1992. Lexington, Kentucky: The University Press of
Kentucky. ISBN 978-0813142296.

Domber, Gregory F. (2008). Supporting the revolution: America,
democracy, and the end of the Cold War in Poland, 1981–1989 (Ph.D.
dissertation (12 September 2007), George Washington University).
ProQuest. pp. 1–506. ISBN 978-0-549-38516-5. Winner of the "2009 Betty
M. Unterberger Prize for Best Dissertation on United States Foreign
Policy from the Society for Historians of American Foreign Relations".
Revised and incorporated in Domber, Gregory F. (2014). Empowering
Revolution: America, Poland, and the End of the Cold War. The New Cold
War History. University of North Carolina Press books.
ISBN 9781469618517.

Gershman, Carl (3 November 1980). "Totalitarian menace (Controversies:
Detente and the left after Afghanistan)". Society. 18 (1): 9–15.
doi:10.1007/BF02694835. ISSN 0147-2011.

Harrington, Michael (3 November 1980). "Nuclear threat (Controversies:
Detente and the left after Afghanistan)". Society. 18 (1): 16–21.
doi:10.1007/BF02694836. ISSN 0147-2011.

Horowitz, Rachelle (2007). "Tom Kahn and the Fight for Democracy: A
Political Portrait and Personal Recollection" (PDF). Democratiya (merged
with Dissent in 2009). 11 (Winter): 204–251.

Kahn, Tom; Podhoretz, Norman (2008). "How to support Solidarnosc: A
debate ('Sponsored by the Committee for the Free World and the League
for Industrial Democracy, with introduction by Midge Decter and
moderation by Carl Gershman, and held at the Polish Institute for Arts
and Sciences, New York City in March 1981')" (PDF). Democratiya (merged
with Dissent in 2009). 13 (Summer): 230–261.

Lipset, Seymour (4 July 1988). "Neoconservatism: Myth and reality".
Society. 25 (5): 29–37. doi:10.1007/BF02695739. ISSN 0147-2011.

Massing, Michael (1987). "Trotsky's orphans: From Bolshevism to
Reaganism". The New Republic: 18–22.

Muravchik, Joshua (January 2006). "Comrades". Commentary Magazine.
Retrieved 15 June 2007.

Puddington, Arch (2005). "Surviving the underground: How American unions
helped solidarity win". American Educator (Summer). Retrieved 4 June
2011.

Shevis, James M. (Summer 1981). "The AFL-CIO and Poland's Solidarity".
World Affairs. 144 (1): 31–35. JSTOR 20671880.

Publications
============

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1990.*

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1978.*

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1979.*

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA.*

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1983.*

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1991.*

-   *New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1981.*

Social Democrats, USA (December 1972) \[copyright 1973\]. The American
challenge: A social-democratic program for the seventies. New York:
S.D. U.S.A. and YPSL. "The following program was adopted at the Social
Democrats, U.S.A. and Young People's Socialist League conventions at the
end of December, 1972".

Hook, Sidney (2005) \[17–18 July 1976\], originally entitled "The social
 democratic prospect: Social democracy and America", "The
social democratic prospect" (PDF), Democratiya, archived by Dissent, 3
(Winter): 63–76, Alternative source.

Hook, Sidney; Rustin, Bayard; Gershman, Carl; Kemble, Penn (1978).
Capitalism, socialism, and democracy. SD Papers. 1. New York: Social
Democrats, USA. Reprinted from Commentary (April 1978) pp. 29–71.

Bayard Rustin and Carl Gershman, Africa, Soviet imperialism and the
retreat of American power. New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1978. (SD
papers \#2).

Gershman, Carl (May 1978). "After the dominoes fell". Commentary. SD
papers. 3.

Carl Gershman The world according to Andrew Young. New York: Social
Democrats, USA, 1978. (SD papers \#4).

Leszek Kołakowski and Sidney Hook, The social democratic challenge. New
York: Social Democrats, USA, 1978. (SD papers \#5).

Carl Gershman, Selling them the rope: Business and the Soviets. New
York: Social Democrats, USA, 1979. (SD papers \#6).

Lane Kirkland and Rita Freedman, Building on the past for the future.
New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1981.

Social Democrats, USA: Standard bearers for freedom, democracy, and
economic justice. New York: Social Democrats, USA, n.d. \[1980s\].

A challenge to the Democratic Party. New York: Social Democrats, USA,
1983.

Alfonso Robelo, The Nicaraguan democratic struggle: Our unfinished
revolution. New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1983. (SD papers \#8).

Scabs renamed, permanent replacements. New York: Social Democrats, USA,
1990.

On foreign policy and defense. Washington, D.C. : Social Democrats, USA,
1990.

SD, USA statement on the economy. New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1991.

Child labor, US style. New York: Social Democrats, USA, 1991.

Child labor, an international abuse. New York: Social Democrats, USA,
1991.

John T. Joyce, Expanding economic democracy. New York: Social Democrats,
USA, 1991.

Rita Freedman, Does America need a social democratic movement?
Washington, DC: Social Democrats, USA, 1993.

Why America needs a social democratic movement. Washington, DC : Social
Democrats, USA, 1993.

The future of socialism. San Jose, CA: San Francisco Bay Area Local of
Social Democrats, USA, 1994.

Further reading
===============

-   *Social Democrats, USA (1973), For the record: The report by the
    Social Democrats, USA on the resignation of Michael Harrington and
    his attempt to split the American socialist movement, New York:
    Social Democrats USA, undated pamphlet, certainly no earlier
    than 1973.*

-   *New York: New Outlook Publishers.*

-   *—"A polemic against the SDUSA published by the Communist Party,
    USA".*

Chenoweth, Eric (October 2010), AFL-CIO support for Solidarity:
Political, financial, moral, 1718 M Street, NW, No. 147, Washington DC
20036, USA: Institute for Democracy in Eastern Europe (IDEE).

Morris, George (1976). "Social Democrats-USA" in the service of
reaction: A record of racism, low wages, bureaucracy and betrayal of
socialism. New York: New Outlook Publishers. —"A polemic against the
SDUSA published by the Communist Party, USA".

Social Democrats, USA (1973), For the record: The report by the Social
Democrats, USA on the resignation of Michael Harrington and his attempt
to split the American socialist movement, New York: Social Democrats
USA, undated pamphlet, certainly no earlier than 1973.

External links
==============

-   *"News and Opinion from Social Democrats USA".*

-   *"Preliminary Inventory of the Social Democrats, USA Records,
    1937–1994".*

"Preliminary Inventory of the Social Democrats, USA Records, 1937–1994".
Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript Library. Duke University. Durham,
North Carolina.

Dale Reed (1999). "Register of the Carl Gershman Papers" (PDF). Hoover
Institution Archives. Stanford University. Stanford, California.

Dale Reed (2010). "Register of the Albert Glotzer Papers" (PDF). Hoover
Institution Archives. Stanford University, Stanford, California.

"News and Opinion from Social Democrats USA".
