**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanley\_Marchant\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Stanley Marchant
================

-   *Sir Stanley Marchant CVO (15 May 1883 – 28 February 1949) was an
    English church musician, teacher and composer.*

-   *After more than 30 years as a church and cathedral organist he was
    appointed principal of the Royal Academy of Music (RAM), and was
    professor of music at the University of London.*

Sir Stanley Marchant CVO (15 May 1883 – 28 February 1949) was an English
church musician, teacher and composer. After more than 30 years as a
church and cathedral organist he was appointed principal of the Royal
Academy of Music (RAM), and was professor of music at the University of
London.

Life and career
===============

-   *From 1947 he was chairman of the council of the Royal School of
    Church Music.*

-   *Marchant was born in London.*

-   *In 1914 Marchant was appointed a professor at the RAM.*

-   *In addition to his RAM duties he was appointed professor of music
    at London University in 1937).*

-   *Marchant died in London, while still in post as principal of the
    RAM, at the age of 65.*

Marchant was born in London. He had a good singing voice as a child and
as a choirboy he decided to devote his life to music. He won a
scholarship to the Royal Academy of Music (RAM), where he won prizes for
composition and organ playing.

From 1899 to 1936 Marchant was a church and cathedral organist, working
successively at Kemsing Parish Church, Kent; Christ Church, Newgate
Street, London (from 1903), and St Peter's, Eaton Square ( from 1913).
In 1903 he was appointed sub-organist at St Paul's Cathedral, and in
1927 he was made organist in succession to Charles Macpherson. At that
time the building was partially closed for restoration. Grove's
Dictionary of Music and Musicians records that Marchant conducted the
reopening ceremony in June 1930 and the thanksgiving service for the
silver jubilee of King George V in 1935, composing for each occasion a
Te Deum. During his career as an organist he was made a Fellow of the
Royal College of Organists in 1902, and took a Doctorate of Music at
Oxford in 1914.

In 1914 Marchant was appointed a professor at the RAM. He became warden
there in 1934 and principal in 1936, at which point he resigned his post
at St Paul's. In addition to his RAM duties he was appointed professor
of music at London University in 1937). The Times said of his tenure at
the RAM that he "breathed a new atmosphere into the conduct of affairs
... so that technical proficiency and a liberal outlook were happily
combined". Marchant was appointed CVO in 1935 and knighted in 1943. In
1946 he was elected an honorary fellow of Pembroke College, Oxford. From
1947 he was chairman of the council of the Royal School of Church Music.
He also chaired consultative panels for the Arts Council and the BBC.

As a composer, Marchant produced mainly church music, including anthems,
canticles and other liturgical music, but he also composed secular works
for chorus, organ and solo voice. Grove says of Marchant's music: "the
finest ... inspired by ceremonial occasions at St Paul's, is well
crafted, though conservative in idiom, and shows the influence of
Stanford and Parry." The choir library at St Paul's holds his complete
choral works.

Marchant married Hilda Constance Holyman; they had a son and a daughter.
Marchant died in London, while still in post as principal of the RAM, at
the age of 65.

References
==========
