**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Summit\_Brewing\_Company\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Summit Brewing Company
======================

-   *The Summit Ratskeller features Summit's entire lineup of beers,
    plus exclusive beers serves only on site, tours, and the Summit
    Brewing Co.*

-   *In July 2018, Summit Brewing Company completed a renovation of the
    Summit Ratskeller, its public bar and patio area.*

-   *As of 2018\[update\], Summit Brewing Co. remains the second-largest
    brewery in Minnesota, after August Schell Brewing Company.*

Summit Brewing Company is a regional craft brewery in Saint Paul,
Minnesota, United States, that brews a wide selection of popular beers.
Currently the 25th largest craft brewer in the U.S., Summit Brewing Co.
produced approximately 115,000 barrels of beer in 2017, with a capacity
of 240,000 barrels per year. Their flagship beer, an English Pale Ale
(branded Summit Extra Pale Ale) is especially popular in the Twin Cities
area.

The brewery was founded in 1986 by local homebrewer Mark Stutrud and a
group of his friends in an old auto parts warehouse on St. Paul's
University Avenue. Their beers quickly became local favorites, and the
company began to grow rapidly. In 1987, the Great Northern Porter won a
gold medal at the Great American Beer Festival and was featured on the
cover of Michael Jackson's New World Guide to Beer (1988). By 1998 the
company's beer production had exceeded the capacity of the original
University Avenue brewery, and a new brewery, designed by architect
Peter O'Brien, was built on the west end of St. Paul, overlooking the
Mississippi River. Still in operation, it was the first new brewery
built from the ground up in St. Paul since before Prohibition. Having
outgrown its original brewing equipment, Summit sold its 1938-vintage
brew house to Mt. Shasta Brewing Company in Northern California. They
then purchased an all-copper, authentic German brew house built in 1971
from the Hürnerbräu Brewery in Ansbach Germany.

As of 2017\[update\], Summit beers are available from distributors in 5
U.S. states (IA, MN, ND, SD, and WI). The brewery currently brews seven
year-round styles, a variety of seasonal styles, and limited release
beers. 2018 saw the launch of new year-round beers such as Summit Dakota
Soul, a traditional Czech-style Pilsener; Summit Skip Rock, a white ale;
and Summit Keller Pils, an award-winning, unfiltered German-style
Pilsner.

In July 2018, Summit Brewing Company completed a renovation of the
Summit Ratskeller, its public bar and patio area. The Summit Ratskeller
features Summit's entire lineup of beers, plus exclusive beers serves
only on site, tours, and the Summit Brewing Co. Gift Shop.

As of 2018\[update\], Summit Brewing Co. remains the second-largest
brewery in Minnesota, after August Schell Brewing Company.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Summit Brewing Company*

Summit Brewing Company

Coordinates: 44°54′50″N 93°8′22″W﻿ / ﻿44.91389°N 93.13944°W﻿ / 44.91389;
-93.13944
