**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tegid\_Foel\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Tegid Foel
==========

-   *Tegid Foel is the husband of Ceridwen in Welsh mythology.*

-   *In folklore, Tegid Foel is associated with Llyn Tegid (Bala Lake)
    in Gwynedd and may have been the tutelary deity of that lake.*

-   *Tegid's name is mentioned several times in Welsh literature in the
    patronymic of his more famous son Mofran; it appears in the
    Mabinogion tales Culhwch and Olwen and The Dream of Rhonabwy, and in
    Welsh Triads 24 and 41.*

Tegid Foel is the husband of Ceridwen in Welsh mythology. His name
rendered into English would be "Tacitus the Bald". In folklore, Tegid
Foel is associated with Llyn Tegid (Bala Lake) in Gwynedd and may have
been the tutelary deity of that lake.

Tegid Foel is known chiefly from the story of Taliesin's birth, first
recorded in full in the 16th century but dating to a much earlier
period. According to the story, he lived by Llyn Tegid in the region of
Penllyn with his wife, the sorceress Ceridwen. Together they had two
children, a beautiful daughter named Creirwy and a son Morfran, called
Afagddu ("utter darkness") because of his dark skin and hideous looks.
Tegid's name is mentioned several times in Welsh literature in the
patronymic of his more famous son Mofran; it appears in the Mabinogion
tales Culhwch and Olwen and The Dream of Rhonabwy, and in Welsh Triads
24 and 41. Apart from Creirwy and Morfran the Welsh genealogies also
name other children of Tegid. The Vitae Sanctorum Britanniae et
Genealogiae gives the following lineage: "Afan Buellt son of Cedig son
of Ceredig son of Cunedda Wledig by Degfed \["Tenth"\] daughter of Tegid
Foel"; Rawlins MS B gives another genealogy naming another daughter,
Dwywai.

Notes
=====

References
==========

-   *.mw-parser-output
    cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
    q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
    a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
    span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
    dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
    a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
    .1em center}.mw-parser-output
    code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
    .cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}ISBN 0-7083-1386-8.*

Bromwich, Rachel (ed.) (2006). Trioedd Ynys Prydein: The Triads of the
Island of Britain. University Of Wales Press. .mw-parser-output
cite.citation{font-style:inherit}.mw-parser-output .citation
q{quotes:"\\"""\\"""'""'"}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-free
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/6/65/Lock-green.svg/9px-Lock-green.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-limited
a,.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-registration
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/d/d6/Lock-gray-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-gray-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .citation .cs1-lock-subscription
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/aa/Lock-red-alt-2.svg/9px-Lock-red-alt-2.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-registration{color:\#555}.mw-parser-output .cs1-subscription
span,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration span{border-bottom:1px
dotted;cursor:help}.mw-parser-output .cs1-ws-icon
a{background:url("//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/4c/Wikisource-logo.svg/12px-Wikisource-logo.svg.png")no-repeat;background-position:right
.1em center}.mw-parser-output
code.cs1-code{color:inherit;background:inherit;border:inherit;padding:inherit}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-hidden-error{display:none;font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-visible-error{font-size:100%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-maint{display:none;color:\#33aa33;margin-left:0.3em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-subscription,.mw-parser-output .cs1-registration,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-format{font-size:95%}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-left,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-left{padding-left:0.2em}.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-right,.mw-parser-output
.cs1-kern-wl-right{padding-right:0.2em}ISBN 0-7083-1386-8.

Gantz, Jeffrey (translator) (1987). The Mabinogion. New York: Penguin.
ISBN 0-14-044322-3.

Ifans, Dafydd & Rhiannon (1980). Y Mabinogion. Gomer. ISBN 1-85902-260-X
