**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tertiary%20education\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.125in"}\
*Students attend a lecture at a tertiary institution: Helsinki
University of Technology*

Tertiary education
==================

-   *Higher education is taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate
    education, while vocational education beyond secondary education is
    known as further education in the United Kingdom, or continuing
    education in the United States.*

-   *Tertiary education, also referred to as third-level, third-stage or
    postsecondary education, is the educational level following the
    completion of a school providing a secondary education.*

Tertiary education, also referred to as third-level, third-stage or
postsecondary education, is the educational level following the
completion of a school providing a secondary education. The World Bank,
for example, defines tertiary education as including universities as
well as trade schools and colleges. Higher education is taken to include
undergraduate and postgraduate education, while vocational education
beyond secondary education is known as further education in the United
Kingdom, or continuing education in the United States.

Tertiary education generally culminates in the receipt of certificates,
diplomas, or academic degrees.

The UNESCO stated that tertiary education focuses on learning endeavors
in specialized fields. It includes academic and higher vocational
education.

The World Bank's 2019 World Development Report on the future of work
argues that given the future of work and the increasing role of
technology in value chains, tertiary education becomes even more
relevant for workers to compete in the labor market.

In the United Kingdom
=====================

-   *"Tertiary education" includes further education (FE), as well as
    higher education (HE).*

-   *In 2018 the Welsh Government adopted the term "tertiary education"
    to refer to post-16 education and training in Wales.*

"Tertiary education" includes further education (FE), as well as higher
education (HE). Since the 1970s, specialized FE colleges, called
“tertiary colleges”, have been set up to offer courses such as A Levels,
that allow progression to HE, alongside vocational courses. An early
example of this which expanded in September 1982 as part of a
reorganization of education in the Halesowen area which also saw
three-tier education axed after just 10 years in force.

In some areas, where schools do not universally offer sixth forms,
tertiary colleges function as a sixth-form college as well as a general
FE college.

Unlike sixth-form colleges, the staff join lecturers' rather than
teachers' unions.

Under devolution in the United Kingdom, education is administered
separately in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and Scotland. In 2018 the
Welsh Government adopted the term "tertiary education" to refer to
post-16 education and training in Wales.

In Australia
============

-   *Tertiary-education options include university, technical and
    further education or private colleges.*

-   *It also refers to any education a student receives after final
    compulsory schooling, which occurs at the age of 17 within
    Australia.*

-   *Within Australia "tertiary education" refers to continuing studies
    after a students Higher School Certificate.*

Within Australia "tertiary education" refers to continuing studies after
a students Higher School Certificate. It also refers to any education a
student receives after final compulsory schooling, which occurs at the
age of 17 within Australia. Tertiary-education options include
university, technical and further education or private colleges.

In the United States of America
===============================

-   *The higher education system in the United States is decentralized
    and essentially independent from regulation by the federal
    government.*

-   *The United States Department of Education presents a broad-spectrum
    view of tertiary education and detailed information on the nation's
    educational structure, accreditation procedures, and connections to
    state as well as federal agencies and entities.*

The higher education system in the United States is decentralized and
essentially independent from regulation by the federal government. It is
diverse because there are private and public institutions. Some are
small and affiliated with religious organizations. Others could be
secular, rural, urban, or suburban. In short, there are a wide variety
of options which are often locally determined. The United States
Department of Education presents a broad-spectrum view of tertiary
education and detailed information on the nation's educational
structure, accreditation procedures, and connections to state as well as
federal agencies and entities.

The Carnegie Classifications of Institutions of Higher Education
provides an explanation so people will understand how American
institutions of higher learning compare to each other. The Carnegie
platform separates all accredited schools that give out degrees into
categories that describe highest degree granted or special areas of
study. US tertiary education includes various non-profit organizations
promoting professional development of individuals in the field of higher
education and helping expand awareness of related issues like
international student services and complete campus internationalization.

In the European Union
=====================

-   *Although tertiary education in the EU includes university, it can
    differ from country to country.*

Although tertiary education in the EU includes university, it can differ
from country to country.

In France
=========

-   *After going to nursery school (French: école maternelle), primary
    school (French: école primaire), college (French: collège), and
    lycee (French: lycée), a student may go to university, but may also
    stop at that point.*

After going to nursery school (French: école maternelle), primary school
(French: école primaire), college (French: collège), and lycee (French:
lycée), a student may go to university, but may also stop at that point.

See also
========

-   *Education by country*

-   *List of countries by tertiary education attainment*

List of countries by tertiary education attainment

Education by country

List of universities and colleges by country

References
==========

Citations
=========

Sources
=======

-   *Academic Culture: A Student's Guide to Studying at University.*

Brick, Jean (2006). "What is academic culture?". Academic Culture: A
Student's Guide to Studying at University. Sydney, N.S.W: National
Centre for English Language Teaching and Research. pp. 1–10.
ISBN 978-1-74138-135-1.

External links
==============

-   *Master of Tertiary Education Management, LH Martin Institute for
    Higher Education Leadership & Management, The University of
    Melbourne*

-   *Tertiary education statistics, UNESCO*

Tertiary education statistics, UNESCO

Master of Tertiary Education Management, LH Martin Institute for Higher
Education Leadership & Management, The University of Melbourne

Quality Research International - (Glossary)

TAFE NSW Official Website
