**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The%20Jerusalem%20Post\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

The Jerusalem Post
==================

-   *The Jerusalem Post is a broadsheet newspaper based in Jerusalem,
    founded in 1932 during the British Mandate of Palestine by Gershon
    Agron as The Palestine Post.*

-   *In 1950, it changed its name to The Jerusalem Post.*

The Jerusalem Post is a broadsheet newspaper based in Jerusalem, founded
in 1932 during the British Mandate of Palestine by Gershon Agron as The
Palestine Post. In 1950, it changed its name to The Jerusalem Post. In
2004, the paper was bought by Mirkaei Tikshoret, a diversified Israeli
media firm controlled by investor Eli Azur. In April 2014, Azur acquired
the newspaper Maariv. The newspaper is published in English and French
editions.

Formerly regarded as left-wing, the paper underwent a noticeable shift
to the right in the late 1980s. From 2004, under then editor-in-chief
David Horovitz, the paper took a more centrist position, competing
against the staunchly left-liberal Haaretz. Its former editor Steve
Linde aimed to provide balanced coverage of the news along with views
from across the political spectrum. In April 2016, Linde stepped down as
editor-in-chief and was replaced by Yaakov Katz, a former military
reporter for the paper who previously served as an adviser to Education
and Diaspora Affairs Minister Naftali Bennett.

History
=======

1925–1950
=========

-   *Accordingly, the Palestine Bulletin published its last issue on 30
    November 1932 and The Palestine Post Incorporating The Palestine
    Bulletin appeared the following day, 1 December 1932.*

-   *During its time as The Palestine Post, the publication supported
    the struggle for a Jewish homeland in Palestine and openly opposed
    British policy restricting Jewish immigration during the Mandate
    period.*

An antecedent paper, The Palestine Bulletin was founded in January 1925
by Jacob Landau of the Jewish Telegraphic Agency. It was owned by the
Palestine Telegraphic Agency, which was in practice part of the JTA even
though it was legally separate. On 1 November 1931, editorship of the
Bulletin was taken over by American journalist Gershon Agronsky (later
Agron). In March 1932, a dispute arose between Landau and Agronsky,
which Agronsky resolved to settle by establishing an independent
newspaper. However, Landau and Agronsky instead came to an agreement to
transform the Bulletin into a new jointly owned newspaper. Accordingly,
the Palestine Bulletin published its last issue on 30 November 1932 and
The Palestine Post Incorporating The Palestine Bulletin appeared the
following day, 1 December 1932. On 25 April 1933, the masthead was
reduced to just The Palestine Post, though the newspaper continued to
state its founding year as 1925 for at least a year afterwards.

During its time as The Palestine Post, the publication supported the
struggle for a Jewish homeland in Palestine and openly opposed British
policy restricting Jewish immigration during the Mandate period.
According to one commentator, "Zionist institutions considered the
newspaper one of the most effective means of exerting influence on the
British authorities."

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="4.156489501312336in"}\
*Palestine Post offices after car bomb attack, 1 February 1948,
Jerusalem*

1948 bombing
============

-   *On the evening of 1 February 1948, a stolen British police car
    loaded with half a ton of TNT pulled up in front of the Jerusalem
    office of the Palestine Post; the driver of a second car arrived a
    few minutes later, lit the fuse and drove off.*

-   *The building also contained other newspaper offices, the British
    press censor, the Jewish settlement police, and a Haganah post with
    a cache of weapons.*

On the evening of 1 February 1948, a stolen British police car loaded
with half a ton of TNT pulled up in front of the Jerusalem office of the
Palestine Post; the driver of a second car arrived a few minutes later,
lit the fuse and drove off. The building also contained other newspaper
offices, the British press censor, the Jewish settlement police, and a
Haganah post with a cache of weapons. Arab leader Abd al-Qadir
al-Husayni claimed responsibility for the bombing, but historian Uri
Milstein reported that the bomb had been prepared by the Nazi-trained
Fawzi el-Kutub, known as "the engineer", with the involvement of two
British army deserters, Cpl. Peter Mersden and Capt. Eddie Brown. Three
persons died in the bombing, a newspaper typesetter and two people who
lived in a nearby block of flats. Dozens of others were injured and the
printing press was destroyed. The morning paper came out in a reduced
format of two pages, printed up at a small print shop nearby.

1950–present
============

-   *Some of the material is translated and included in the free Hebrew
    daily Israel Post, of which Eli Azur is a co-owner.*

-   *The Jerusalem Post also publishes a monthly magazine titled IVRIT
    edited by Dr. Sarit Yalov.*

-   *In 1950, two years after the State of Israel was declared, the
    paper was renamed The Jerusalem Post.*

In 1950, two years after the State of Israel was declared, the paper was
renamed The Jerusalem Post.

The broadsheet newspaper is published from Sunday to Friday, with no
edition appearing on Saturday (the Jewish Sabbath) and Jewish religious
holidays. Regular opinion columnists write on subjects such as religion,
foreign affairs and economics. As of 2016\[update\] the managing editor
is David Brinn.\
Some of the material is translated and included in the free Hebrew daily
Israel Post, of which Eli Azur is a co-owner.

In January, 2008, the paper announced a new partnership with The Wall
Street Journal, including joint marketing and exclusive publication in
Israel of The Wall Street Journal Europe.

The Jerusalem Post also publishes a monthly magazine titled IVRIT edited
by Dr. Sarit Yalov. Its target audience is people learning Hebrew
language and it is described as "an easy-Hebrew" publication, meant for
improving basic Hebrew reading skills. It uses the vowel notation system
to make comprehension of the Hebrew alphabet abjad simpler. The
Jerusalem Report, now edited by Steve Linde, is a fortnightly print and
online glossy newsmagazine.

Ownership changes
=================

-   *CanWest Global Communications, Canada's biggest media concern, had
    announced an agreement to take a 50 percent stake in The Jerusalem
    Post after Mirkaei bought the property, but the deal soured.*

-   *A number of journalists resigned from the Post after Black's
    takeover and founded The Jerusalem Report, a weekly magazine
    eventually sold to the Post.*

Until 1989, the paper supported the forerunners of the Labor Party. In
1989, the paper was purchased by Hollinger Inc., owned by Conrad Black.
A number of journalists resigned from the Post after Black's takeover
and founded The Jerusalem Report, a weekly magazine eventually sold to
the Post. The leader of the walkout was David Landau, who founded the
Haaretz English Edition and went on to become editor-in-chief of Haaretz
until 2009.

Under editor-in-chief David Makovsky, from 1999 to 2000, the paper took
a centrist position. In 2002, Hollinger hired the politically
conservative Bret Stephens of The Wall Street Journal as
editor-in-chief. David Horovitz, who holds a center-left worldview, took
over as editor-in-chief on 1 October 2004. He was expected to have the
paper eschew any clear political line, and the paper turned centrist
again. On 16 November 2004, Hollinger sold the paper to Mirkaei
Tikshoret Limited, a Tel Aviv-based publisher of Israeli newspapers.
CanWest Global Communications, Canada's biggest media concern, had
announced an agreement to take a 50 percent stake in The Jerusalem Post
after Mirkaei bought the property, but the deal soured. The two sides
went to arbitration, and CanWest lost. In 2011, Horovitz was succeeded
by the paper's managing editor, Steve Linde, who sought to maintain its
political moderation and balance. Yaakov Katz succeeded Linde in April
2016.

Notable contributors
====================

Websites
========

JPost.com
=========

-   *The site is an entity separate from the daily newspaper.*

-   *JPost.com includes the "Premium Zone", a pay-wall protected area,
    containing additional Jerusalem Post articles and special features.*

-   *Its staff is based in Tel Aviv, while the newspaper offices are
    located in Jerusalem.*

JPost.com was launched in December 1996. Its current version also
contains a French language edition (fr.jpost.com), blogs, an ePaper
version of the daily newspaper, a range of magazines and other web
versions of the Group's products.

According to Alexa Internet traffic rankings, JPost.com is among the top
3,000 websites in the United States. The site is an entity separate from
the daily newspaper. While sharing reporters, it is managed by different
teams. Its staff is based in Tel Aviv, while the newspaper offices are
located in Jerusalem.

The site contains archives that go back to 1989, and the default search
on the site sends users to archive listings, powered by ProQuest, where
articles can be purchased. Free blurbs of the article are available as
well, and full articles are available when linked to directly from
navigation within JPost.com or from a search engine.

JPost.com includes the "Premium Zone", a pay-wall protected area,
containing additional Jerusalem Post articles and special features. The
site, which was given a graphic facelift in September 2014, recently
relaunched its mobile and tablet applications, as well as its special
edition for mobile viewing.

Editors
=======

-   *David Bar-Illan (1992–1996)*

-   *N. David Gross (1990–1992)*

-   *David Horovitz (2004–2011)*

-   *David Makovsky (1999–2000)*

-   *Steve Linde (2011–2016)*

-   *Yaakov Katz (since 2016)*

Gershon Agron (1932–1955)

Ted Lurie (1955–1974)

Lea Ben Dor (1974–1975)

Ari Rath and Erwin Frenkel (1975–1989)

N. David Gross (1990–1992)

David Bar-Illan (1992–1996)

Jeff Barak (1996–1999)

David Makovsky (1999–2000)

Carl Schrag (2000)

Jeff Barak (2000–2002)

Bret Stephens (2002–2004)

David Horovitz (2004–2011)

Steve Linde (2011–2016)

Yaakov Katz (since 2016)

See also
========

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Palestine Post—complete searchable contents 1932–1950*

-   *Palestine Bulletin—complete searchable contents 1925–1932*

Official website

Official website ‹See Tfd›(in French)

Palestine Post—complete searchable contents 1932–1950

Palestine Bulletin—complete searchable contents 1925–1932
