**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The%20National%20Interest\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

The National Interest
=====================

-   *The National Interest (TNI) is an American bimonthly international
    affairs magazine published by the Center for the National Interest.*

The National Interest (TNI) is an American bimonthly international
affairs magazine published by the Center for the National Interest. It
is associated with the realist school of foreign policy thought. It was
founded in 1985 by Irving Kristol and until 2001 was edited by Owen
Harries. The National Interest is not restricted in content to "foreign
policy" in the narrow, technical sense but attempts to pay attention to
broad ideas and the way in which cultural and social differences,
technological innovations, history, and religion affect the behavior of
states.

Readership and design
=====================

-   *In 2006, the magazine adopted a new, glossier cover format, based
    around a central image and tagline, making it look more like the
    Georgetown Journal of International Affairs or Foreign Policy as
    opposed to the staid, text-only covers of Foreign Affairs or
    Commentary.*

-   *In July 2015, the magazine published an article by Maria Butina
    advocating improved relations between the Russian Federation and a
    future US Republican Presidential administration.*

TNI has an international readership, and excerpts from its articles have
been published in The New York Times, the Financial Times, The
Australian, International Herald Tribune, Shin Dong-A, The Spectator,
and Austria's Europ√§ische Rundschau (de), as well as on online sites
such as the Russian InoSMI.ru.

In 2006, the magazine adopted a new, glossier cover format, based around
a central image and tagline, making it look more like the Georgetown
Journal of International Affairs or Foreign Policy as opposed to the
staid, text-only covers of Foreign Affairs or Commentary. The magazine
also added daily online content to its website.

In July 2015, the magazine published an article by Maria Butina
advocating improved relations between the Russian Federation and a
future US Republican Presidential administration. In 2018, Butina was
arrested by the FBI and charged with conspiring to act as an
unregistered Russian agent.

Editors
=======

-   *The magazine's honorary chairman is Henry Kissinger.*

-   *Since July 2013, the magazine's editor has been Jacob Heilbrunn.*

Since July 2013, the magazine's editor has been Jacob Heilbrunn. The
advisory council was chaired by James Schlesinger until his death in
2014, and has since been chaired by Charles G. Boyd. The magazine's
honorary chairman is Henry Kissinger. Dimitri K. Simes is the publisher,
while Paul J. Saunders is the associate publisher.

Among the members of the magazine's advisory council are Morton
Abramowitz, Graham Allison, John Mearsheimer, and Dov Zakheim. The
contributing editors are Andrew J. Bacevich, Ian Bremmer, Ted Galen
Carpenter, Bruce Hoffman, Andrew Kohut, Paul R. Pillar, Milton Ezrati,
and Kenneth M. Pollack. Anatol Lieven and former editor Nikolas Gvosdev
serve as senior editors.

See also
========

-   *National Affairs*

The American Interest, founded in 2005 by former members of the TNI
editorial board

National Affairs

Coalition for a Realistic Foreign Policy

Timeline of Russian interference in the 2016 United States elections

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Official website*

Official website
