**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The%20America%20We%20Deserve\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

The America We Deserve
======================

-   *It was published in January 2000, while Trump was considering
    running for president in that year's election on the Reform Party's
    ticket.*

-   *The America We Deserve is a book about public policy written by
    American businessman and current U.S. President Donald Trump and
    author Dave Shiflett.*

-   *The book lists and details a set of policy proposals Trump intended
    to implement should he ever become president.*

The America We Deserve is a book about public policy written by American
businessman and current U.S. President Donald Trump and author Dave
Shiflett. It was published in January 2000, while Trump was considering
running for president in that year's election on the Reform Party's
ticket. The book lists and details a set of policy proposals Trump
intended to implement should he ever become president.

Positions and proposals
=======================

-   *Trump also proposed a 14.25% tax on individuals and trusts valued
    at more than \$10 million.*

-   *In the book, Trump expressed anti-illegal-immigration views similar
    to those that he espoused when he ran for president successfully
    in 2016.*

In the book, Trump expressed anti-illegal-immigration views similar to
those that he espoused when he ran for president successfully in 2016.
For example, he wrote, "A liberal policy of immigration may seem to
reflect confidence and generosity. But our current laxness toward
illegal immigration shows a recklessness and disregard for those who
live here legally."

Trump also proposed a 14.25% tax on individuals and trusts valued at
more than \$10 million.

Expectations of terrorism
=========================

-   *Trump also incorrectly claimed (e.g.*

-   *in a 2015 interview with Alex Jones) that Bin Laden was not very
    well known in 2000, and that in the book, Trump personally called
    for someone to "take him out".*

-   *During his 2016 presidential campaign, Trump frequently cited the
    book on the campaign trail as proof that he predicted the September
    11 attacks that occurred in 2001.*

During his 2016 presidential campaign, Trump frequently cited the book
on the campaign trail as proof that he predicted the September 11
attacks that occurred in 2001. This is because he mentioned Osama Bin
Laden in the book; however, Trump did not predict that Bin Laden would
commit a terrorist attack against the United States in the book. Trump
also incorrectly claimed (e.g. in a 2015 interview with Alex Jones) that
Bin Laden was not very well known in 2000, and that in the book, Trump
personally called for someone to "take him out".

Trump did, however, predict that a major terror attack (not mentioning
Bin Laden or anyone else as a perpetrator) would soon occur in the U.S.,
writing, "I really am convinced we're in danger of the sort of terrorist
attacks that will make the \[1993\] bombing of the \[World\] Trade
Center look like kids playing with firecrackers." A bit less than two
years after its publication, a major terrorist attack occurred,
involving another attack on the World Trade Center, this time destroying
the buildings, as well as an attack on the Pentagon.

Reviews
=======

-   *In the February 2000 issue of The American Spectator, Shiflett
    wrote that the book "will appeal to the established Trump
    constituency, but also hopes to show the author as worthy of wider
    support."*

-   *In a January 2000 review in New York magazine, Walter Kirn wrote
    that all of the humor in the book was unintentional and described
    the book's best joke as the fact that "Trump seems to think he's
    writing out of pity, and campaigning because he cares."*

In the February 2000 issue of The American Spectator, Shiflett wrote
that the book "will appeal to the established Trump constituency, but
also hopes to show the author as worthy of wider support." In a January
2000 review in New York magazine, Walter Kirn wrote that all of the
humor in the book was unintentional and described the book's best joke
as the fact that "Trump seems to think he's writing out of pity, and
campaigning because he cares."

See also
========

-   *Bibliography of Donald Trump*

Bibliography of Donald Trump

Time to Get Tough

References
==========
