**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The%20Dangerous%20Case%20of%20Donald%20Trump\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump
==================================

-   *The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump is a 2017 book edited by
    Bandy X. Lee, a forensic psychiatrist, containing essays from 27
    psychiatrists, psychologists, and other mental health professionals
    on the "clear and present danger" that US President Donald Trump's
    mental health poses to the "nation and individual well being".*

The Dangerous Case of Donald Trump is a 2017 book edited by Bandy X.
Lee, a forensic psychiatrist, containing essays from 27 psychiatrists,
psychologists, and other mental health professionals on the "clear and
present danger" that US President Donald Trump's mental health poses to
the "nation and individual well being".\[citation needed\] They argue
that the President's mental health was affecting the mental health of
the people of the United States and that he places the country at grave
risk of involving it in a war and of undermining democracy itself
because of his pathological dangerousness.

Consequently, they claim, Trump's presidency represents an emergency not
only allowing, but perhaps also requiring, psychiatrists in the United
States to raise alarms. While it has been repeatedly claimed that they
have broken the American Psychiatric Association's Goldwater rule, which
holds that it is unethical for psychiatrists to give professional
opinions about public figures without examining them in person, the
authors maintain that pointing out danger and calling for an evaluation
is different from diagnosis. They have rather criticized the APA for
changing professional norms and standards, stating that it is dangerous
to turn reasonable ethical guidelines into a gag rule under political
pressure.

Various opinions
================

-   *According to Jeannie Suk Gersen in The New Yorker, "A strange
    consensus does appear to be forming around Trump's mental state,"
    including Democrats and Republicans who doubt Trump's fitness for
    office.*

-   *In a blog post republished on Salon in September 2017, journalist
    Bill Moyers wrote that "\[t\]here will not be a book published this
    fall more urgent, important, or controversial than The Dangerous
    Case of Donald Trump".*

According to Jeannie Suk Gersen in The New Yorker, "A strange consensus
does appear to be forming around Trump's mental state," including
Democrats and Republicans who doubt Trump's fitness for office.

In a blog post republished on Salon in September 2017, journalist Bill
Moyers wrote that "\[t\]here will not be a book published this fall more
urgent, important, or controversial than The Dangerous Case of Donald
Trump". In an interview with Robert Jay Lifton, Moyers said that Trump
"makes increasingly bizarre statements that are contradicted by
irrefutable evidence to the contrary." Lifton said, "He doesn't have
clear contact with reality, though I'm not sure it qualifies as a bona
fide delusion." As an example, Lifton said, when Trump claimed that
former president Barack Obama was born in Kenya, "he was manipulating
that lie as well as undoubtedly believing it in part."

Carlos Lozada in The Washington Post wrote that many politicians and
commentators referred to Trump as "crazy" or doubted his mental health.
In this book, mental health professionals examine that claim. They
conclude that "anyone as mentally unstable as Mr. Trump simply should
not be entrusted with the life-and-death powers of the presidency."
Lozada wrote that these conclusions are "compelling," but presidents
with mental illness, like depression, can be effective, and presidents
without mental illness can still be dangerous.

Book evaluations
================

-   *At the risk of practicing medicine without a license, I'd suggest
    that this historical comparison is de facto evidence of \[Trump
    Derangement Syndrome\] – and paranoid grandiosity".*

-   *Writing for RealClearPolitics, Carl M. Cannon, by contrast, argued
    that the book's foreword, by psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton, "offers
    the melodramatic view that clinicians who don't warn the world about
    Donald Trump's shortcomings are akin to Nazi doctors who worked at
    Auschwitz.*

Estelle Freedman, the Robinson Professor in U.S. History at Stanford
University, said of the book:

Writing for RealClearPolitics, Carl M. Cannon, by contrast, argued that
the book's foreword, by psychiatrist Robert Jay Lifton, "offers the
melodramatic view that clinicians who don't warn the world about Donald
Trump's shortcomings are akin to Nazi doctors who worked at Auschwitz.
At the risk of practicing medicine without a license, I'd suggest that
this historical comparison is de facto evidence of \[Trump Derangement
Syndrome\] – and paranoid grandiosity".

References
==========

See also
========

-   *Bush on the Couch*

Bush on the Couch
