**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tiffin\_City\_School\_District\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Tiffin City School District
===========================

-   *Tiffin Middle School houses grades 6-8.*

-   *Tiffin City School District is a public school district in the city
    of Tiffin, Ohio, United States.*

-   *Columbian High School is the building that contains grades 9-12 for
    the district.*

-   *This school district consists of five elementary K-5 buildings; one
    middle school which has grades 6-8 and one high school which
    contains grades 9-12.*

Tiffin City School District is a public school district in the city of
Tiffin, Ohio, United States. Currently, there are approximately 2,850
students that attend Tiffin City Schools. This school district consists
of five elementary K-5 buildings; one middle school which has grades 6-8
and one high school which contains grades 9-12. The mission statement of
the school district is, “Tiffin City Schools guarantees that all
students achieve success at their full learning potential.”

Columbian High School is the building that contains grades 9-12 for the
district. It houses approximately 900 students and 85 staff members.
Students that attend Columbian do not only have the option to take the
139 classes that are offered, they can also take courses through Post
Secondary Education Options at three different institutions. Those
institutions include Heidelberg University, Tiffin University and Terra
Community College. Several students attend Sentinel Career Center and
the Technology Center. There are also 17 varsity sports and 25 clubs
that students can be involved with throughout the school year.

Tiffin Middle School houses grades 6-8. The school was built in 2003
making it the newest building within the school district. This school
accommodates about 650 students and 65 staff members. There are many
different class options that the students can choose from and there are
also selected athletics that students may participate in during the
school year.

There are also three elementary buildings that contain grades K-5. These
buildings are Washington Elementary, Krout Elementary, and Noble
Elementary.

Schools
=======

Elementary schools
==================

-   *Krout Elementary School (Grades 2-3*

-   *Washington Elementary School (Grades K through 1st ) 151 Elmer St.
    Tiffin, OH 44883*

-   *Noble Elementary School (Grades 4-5*

Krout Elementary School (Grades 2-3

Noble Elementary School (Grades 4-5

Washington Elementary School (Grades K through 1st ) 151 Elmer St.
Tiffin, OH 44883

Middle schools
==============

-   *Tiffin Middle School (Grades 6th through 8th)*

Tiffin Middle School (Grades 6th through 8th)

High schools
============

-   *Columbian High School (Grades 9th through 12th)*

Columbian High School (Grades 9th through 12th)

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Tiffin City School District website*

Tiffin City School District website
