**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tina%20Smith\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Tina Smith
==========

-   *Christine Elizabeth "Tina" Flint Smith (born March 4, 1958) is an
    American politician and former businesswoman serving as the junior
    United States senator from Minnesota since 2018.*

-   *Smith served as the 48th lieutenant governor of Minnesota from 2015
    to 2018 before being appointed to fill the United States Senate seat
    vacated by Al Franken.*

Christine Elizabeth "Tina" Flint Smith (born March 4, 1958) is an
American politician and former businesswoman serving as the junior
United States senator from Minnesota since 2018. She is a member of the
Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party (DFL), an affiliate of the
Democratic Party. Smith served as the 48th lieutenant governor of
Minnesota from 2015 to 2018 before being appointed to fill the United
States Senate seat vacated by Al Franken. She won the 2018 special
election to fill the remainder of Franken's term, defeating Republican
Karin Housley, a Minnesota state senator.

Early life and education
========================

-   *Smith was born on March 4, 1958 in Albuquerque, New Mexico, the
    daughter of Christine, a teacher, and F. Harlan Flint, a lawyer.*

Smith was born on March 4, 1958 in Albuquerque, New Mexico, the daughter
of Christine, a teacher, and F. Harlan Flint, a lawyer. Before going to
college, she worked on the Trans-Alaskan Pipeline in Prudhoe Bay,
Alaska. She graduated from Stanford University with a degree in
political science, and later earned a master's degree in business
administration from Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth College.

Early career
============

-   *After Minnesota's U.S.*

-   *Smith first moved to Minnesota in 1984 for a marketing job at
    General Mills.*

-   *Dayton appointed Smith as his chief of staff when he took office
    in 2011.*

-   *Smith then joined the campaign of Mark Dayton, who skipped the
    endorsing convention and eventually won the DFL primary.*

-   *After Dayton defeated Republican Tom Emmer in the general election,
    Smith was named a co-chair of the transition.*

Smith first moved to Minnesota in 1984 for a marketing job at General
Mills. She later started her own marketing firm, where she consulted
with businesses and nonprofits. In the early 1990s Smith became involved
in local politics, volunteering for DFL campaigns in Minneapolis. She
managed Ted Mondale's unsuccessful 1998 campaign for governor. After
Minnesota's U.S. Senator Paul Wellstone died in a plane crash weeks
before the 2002 election, Smith managed former U.S. Vice President
Walter Mondale's campaign for the seat. After Mondale lost a narrow
election to Norm Coleman, Smith began working as the vice president of
external affairs at Planned Parenthood of Minnesota, North Dakota, and
South Dakota.

Smith left her job at Planned Parenthood to serve as chief of staff to
Minneapolis Mayor R.T. Rybak in 2006. In 2010 she was picked to manage
Rybak's gubernatorial campaign, which ended after Margaret Anderson
Kelliher won the DFL endorsement. Smith then joined the campaign of Mark
Dayton, who skipped the endorsing convention and eventually won the DFL
primary. After Dayton defeated Republican Tom Emmer in the general
election, Smith was named a co-chair of the transition. Dayton appointed
Smith as his chief of staff when he took office in 2011.

Lieutenant Governor of Minnesota
================================

2014 election
=============

-   *Smith stepped down as Dayton's chief of staff to campaign for
    lieutenant governor.*

-   *When Lieutenant Governor Yvonne Prettner Solon announced she would
    not seek reelection, Governor Mark Dayton selected Smith as his
    running mate in the 2014 gubernatorial election.*

-   *Dayton cited Smith's work on passing legislation for new Minnesota
    Vikings Stadium, as well as her support for the Destination Medical
    Center project with the Mayo Clinic in Rochester.*

When Lieutenant Governor Yvonne Prettner Solon announced she would not
seek reelection, Governor Mark Dayton selected Smith as his running mate
in the 2014 gubernatorial election. Dayton cited Smith's work on passing
legislation for new Minnesota Vikings Stadium, as well as her support
for the Destination Medical Center project with the Mayo Clinic in
Rochester.

Smith stepped down as Dayton's chief of staff to campaign for lieutenant
governor. After being nominated by acclamation at the DFL state
convention, and facing only token opposition in the DFL gubernatorial
primary, Dayton and Smith defeated Republicans Jeff Johnson and Bill
Kuisle in the general election.

Tenure
======

-   *Smith took office as lieutenant governor on January 5, 2015, and
    served until she was appointed to represent Minnesota in the U.S.
    Senate on January 2, 2018.*

-   *Despite widespread speculation to the contrary, Smith announced in
    March 2017 that she would not run for governor in the 2018
    election.*

Smith took office as lieutenant governor on January 5, 2015, and served
until she was appointed to represent Minnesota in the U.S. Senate on
January 2, 2018. During her tenure Smith was described by many political
observers as having a much higher profile and playing a much more
significant role in legislative negotiations than her predecessors. She
spent a significant amount of time traveling the state in support of the
priorities of Dayton's administration, including funding for optional
preschool for all four-year-olds, transportation infrastructure, and
rural broadband internet access. She also served as chair of the
Destination Medical Center board until her resignation in December 2017.

In 2016 Roll Call named Smith to their "America's Top 25 Most
Influential Women in State Politics" list, citing her high-profile role
in the Dayton administration.

Despite widespread speculation to the contrary, Smith announced in March
2017 that she would not run for governor in the 2018 election.

U.S. Senate
===========

Appointment
===========

-   *Dayton issued the official certificate of appointment following
    Franken's resignation on January 2, 2018.*

-   *On December 13, 2017, Governor Dayton announced Smith as his pick
    to fill the United States Senate seat held by Al Franken, who
    indicated he would be resigning the seat at a later date amid
    allegations of sexual misconduct.*

-   *While political observers initially speculated Smith might serve in
    a caretaker role, she announced her candidacy in the 2018 special
    election.*

On December 13, 2017, Governor Dayton announced Smith as his pick to
fill the United States Senate seat held by Al Franken, who indicated he
would be resigning the seat at a later date amid allegations of sexual
misconduct. While political observers initially speculated Smith might
serve in a caretaker role, she announced her candidacy in the 2018
special election.

Dayton issued the official certificate of appointment following
Franken's resignation on January 2, 2018.

Tenure
======

-   *She was accompanied by fellow Minnesota Senator Amy Klobuchar and
    former Vice President Walter Mondale.*

-   *With Vice President Mike Pence issuing the oath of office, Smith
    was officially sworn in as a United States Senator on January 3,
    2018, alongside Doug Jones of Alabama.*

With Vice President Mike Pence issuing the oath of office, Smith was
officially sworn in as a United States Senator on January 3, 2018,
alongside Doug Jones of Alabama. She was accompanied by fellow Minnesota
Senator Amy Klobuchar and former Vice President Walter Mondale.

Committee assignments
=====================

-   *Committee on Energy and Natural Resources (January 10, 2018 -
    January 3, 2019)*

-   *Source: Senate Democrats Press Release\[27\]*

Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry\
Subcommittee on Commodities, Risk Management and Trade\
Subcommittee on Rural Development and Energy (Ranking Member)\
Subcommittee on Nutrition, Agricultural Research and Specialty Crops

Committee on Energy and Natural Resources (January 10, 2018 - January 3,
2019)

Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs (since January 3, 2019)

Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions\
Subcommittee on Children and Families\
Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety

Committee on Indian Affairs

Source: Senate Democrats Press Release\[27\]

Legislation sponsored
=====================

-   *The following is an incomplete list of legislation that Smith has
    sponsored:*

The following is an incomplete list of legislation that Smith has
sponsored:

Affordable College Textbook Act (S. 1864; 115th Congress)

2018 election
=============

-   *Smith competed in the 2018 special Senate election in Minnesota.*

Smith competed in the 2018 special Senate election in Minnesota. She won
the August 14 Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party primary with 76%
of the vote. Richard Painter, a White House ethics lawyer during the
George W. Bush administration, finished second with 14%. Smith defeated
Republican nominee Karin Housley, a state senator from St. Marys Point,
in the November 6 general election, winning 53% of the vote to Housley's
42%.

Political positions
===================

Abortion
========

-   *Smith is a vocal supporter of abortion rights and the only member
    of the United States Senate to have worked for Planned Parenthood.*

Smith is a vocal supporter of abortion rights and the only member of the
United States Senate to have worked for Planned Parenthood. She supports
the use of federal funds for abortion procedures and opposed legislation
that would require doctors perform lifesaving medical care for babies
born as a result of botched abortions.

Agriculture
===========

-   *In March 2019 Smith was one of 38 senators to sign a letter to
    United States Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue warning that
    dairy farmers "have continued to face market instability and are
    struggling to survive the fourth year of sustained low prices" and
    urging his department to "strongly encourage these farmers to
    consider the Dairy Margin Coverage program."*

In March 2019 Smith was one of 38 senators to sign a letter to United
States Secretary of Agriculture Sonny Perdue warning that dairy farmers
"have continued to face market instability and are struggling to survive
the fourth year of sustained low prices" and urging his department to
"strongly encourage these farmers to consider the Dairy Margin Coverage
program."

Climate change
==============

-   *In November 2018 Smith was one of 25 Democratic senators to
    cosponsor a resolution in response to findings of the
    Intergovernmental Panel On Climate Change report and National
    Climate Assessment.*

In November 2018 Smith was one of 25 Democratic senators to cosponsor a
resolution in response to findings of the Intergovernmental Panel On
Climate Change report and National Climate Assessment. The resolution
affirmed the senators' acceptance of the findings and their support for
bold action to address climate change.

Criminal justice reform
=======================

-   *In December 2018 Smith voted for the First Step Act, legislation
    aimed at reducing recidivism rates among federal prisoners by
    expanding job training and other programs in addition to expanding
    early-release programs and modifying sentencing laws such as
    mandatory minimum sentences for nonviolent drug offenders, "to more
    equitably punish drug offenders."*

In December 2018 Smith voted for the First Step Act, legislation aimed
at reducing recidivism rates among federal prisoners by expanding job
training and other programs in addition to expanding early-release
programs and modifying sentencing laws such as mandatory minimum
sentences for nonviolent drug offenders, "to more equitably punish drug
offenders."

Drug policy
===========

-   *In December 2018 Smith was one of 21 senators to sign a letter to
    Commissioner of Food and Drugs Scott Gottlieb stating their approval
    of the actions of the Food and Drugs Administration to hinder youth
    access to e-cigarettes and urging the FDA "to take additional,
    stronger steps to prevent and reduce e-cigarette use among youth."*

In December 2018 Smith was one of 21 senators to sign a letter to
Commissioner of Food and Drugs Scott Gottlieb stating their approval of
the actions of the Food and Drugs Administration to hinder youth access
to e-cigarettes and urging the FDA "to take additional, stronger steps
to prevent and reduce e-cigarette use among youth."

Foreign policy
==============

-   *In April 2019 Smith was one of 34 senators to sign a letter to
    President Trump asserting that Trump had "consistently expressed a
    flawed understanding of U.S. foreign assistance" since becoming
    president and that by preventing the use of Fiscal Year 2018
    national security funding he was "personally undermining efforts to
    promote U.S. national security and economic prosperity".*

In April 2019 Smith was one of 34 senators to sign a letter to President
Trump asserting that Trump had "consistently expressed a flawed
understanding of U.S. foreign assistance" since becoming president and
that by preventing the use of Fiscal Year 2018 national security funding
he was "personally undermining efforts to promote U.S. national security
and economic prosperity". The senators argued that foreign assistance to
Central American countries decreased migration to the U.S. by helping to
improve conditions in those countries.

Gun control
===========

-   *In March 2018 Smith was one of ten senators to sign a letter to
    Chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Health, Education,
    Labor and Pensions Lamar Alexander and ranking Democrat Patty Murray
    requesting they schedule a hearing on the causes and remedies of
    mass shootings in the wake of the Stoneman Douglas High School
    shooting.*

In March 2018 Smith was one of ten senators to sign a letter to Chairman
of the United States Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and
Pensions Lamar Alexander and ranking Democrat Patty Murray requesting
they schedule a hearing on the causes and remedies of mass shootings in
the wake of the Stoneman Douglas High School shooting.

Health care
===========

-   *In the lead-up to the 2018 elections, Smith stated that her record
    in the Senate shows she will fight pharmaceutical companies to
    improve people's lives.*

-   *In December 2018 Smith was one of 42 senators to sign a letter to
    Trump administration officials Alex Azar, Seema Verma, and Steve
    Mnuchin arguing that the administration was improperly using Section
    1332 of the Affordable Care Act to authorize states to "increase
    health care costs for millions of consumers while weakening
    protections for individuals with pre-existing conditions."*

In the lead-up to the 2018 elections, Smith stated that her record in
the Senate shows she will fight pharmaceutical companies to improve
people's lives. She said she will continue to fight to lower the cost of
health care and prescription drugs in Minnesota, for example by making
generic drugs more available, preventing citizens with pre-existing
conditions from being charged more, and allowing Minnesotans to buy in
to Medicare if they are not satisfied with their options on the
insurance market.

In December 2018 Smith was one of 42 senators to sign a letter to Trump
administration officials Alex Azar, Seema Verma, and Steve Mnuchin
arguing that the administration was improperly using Section 1332 of the
Affordable Care Act to authorize states to "increase health care costs
for millions of consumers while weakening protections for individuals
with pre-existing conditions." The senators requested the administration
withdraw the policy and "re-engage with stakeholders, states, and
Congress."

In January 2019, during the 2018–19 United States federal government
shutdown, Smith was one of 34 senators to sign a letter to Commissioner
of Food and Drugs Scott Gottlieb recognizing the efforts of the FDA to
address the shutdown's effect on public health and employees while
remaining alarmed "that the continued shutdown will result in
increasingly harmful effects on the agency’s employees and the safety
and security of the nation’s food and medical products."

In February 2019 Smith was one of 11 senators to sign a letter to
insulin manufactures Eli Lilly and Company, Novo Nordisk, and Sanofi
about their increased insulin prices having deprived patients of "access
to the life-saving medications they need."

Housing
=======

-   *In April 2019 Smith was one of 41 senators to sign a bipartisan
    letter to the housing subcommittee praising the United States
    Department of Housing and Urban Development's Section 4 Capacity
    Building program as authorizing "HUD to partner with national
    nonprofit community development organizations to provide education,
    training, and financial support to local community development
    corporations (CDCs) across the country" and expressing
    disappointment that President Trump's budget "has slated this
    program for elimination after decades of successful economic and
    community development."*

In April 2019 Smith was one of 41 senators to sign a bipartisan letter
to the housing subcommittee praising the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development's Section 4 Capacity Building program as
authorizing "HUD to partner with national nonprofit community
development organizations to provide education, training, and financial
support to local community development corporations (CDCs) across the
country" and expressing disappointment that President Trump's budget
"has slated this program for elimination after decades of successful
economic and community development." The senators wrote of their hope
that the subcommittee would support continued funding for Section 4 in
Fiscal Year 2020.

Immigration
===========

-   *In August 2018 Smith was one of 17 senators to sign a letter
    spearheaded by Kamala Harris to United States Secretary of Homeland
    Security Kirstjen Nielsen demanding that the Trump administration
    take immediate action in attempting to reunite 539 migrant children
    with their families, citing each passing day of inaction as
    intensifying "trauma that this administration has needlessly caused
    for children and their families seeking humanitarian protection."*

In August 2018 Smith was one of 17 senators to sign a letter spearheaded
by Kamala Harris to United States Secretary of Homeland Security
Kirstjen Nielsen demanding that the Trump administration take immediate
action in attempting to reunite 539 migrant children with their
families, citing each passing day of inaction as intensifying "trauma
that this administration has needlessly caused for children and their
families seeking humanitarian protection." She also supports the
extension of DACA, to shield "Dreamers" from deportation.

Infrastructure
==============

-   *In June 2019, Smith was one of eight senators to sponsor the Made
    in America Act, legislation that would designate federal programs
    which had funded infrastructure projects not currently subject to
    Buy America standards and mandate the materials used in these
    federal programs were domestically produced.*

In June 2019, Smith was one of eight senators to sponsor the Made in
America Act, legislation that would designate federal programs which had
funded infrastructure projects not currently subject to Buy America
standards and mandate the materials used in these federal programs were
domestically produced. Bill cosponsor Tammy Baldwin said the bill would
strengthen Buy America requirements of the federal government and that
she was hopeful both Democrats and Republicans would support "this
effort to make sure our government is buying American products and
supporting American workers."

LGBT issues
===========

-   *In October 2018 Smith was one of 20 senators to sign a letter to
    Secretary of State Mike Pompeo urging him to reverse the rolling
    back of a policy that granted visas to same-sex partners of LGBTQ
    diplomats who had unions that were not recognized by their home
    countries, writing that too many places around the world have seen
    LGBTQ individuals "subjected to discrimination and unspeakable
    violence, and receive little or no protection from the law or local
    authorities" and that refusing to let LGBTQ diplomats bring their
    partners to the US would be equivalent of upholding "the
    discriminatory policies of many countries around the world."*

In October 2018 Smith was one of 20 senators to sign a letter to
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo urging him to reverse the rolling back of
a policy that granted visas to same-sex partners of LGBTQ diplomats who
had unions that were not recognized by their home countries, writing
that too many places around the world have seen LGBTQ individuals
"subjected to discrimination and unspeakable violence, and receive
little or no protection from the law or local authorities" and that
refusing to let LGBTQ diplomats bring their partners to the US would be
equivalent of upholding "the discriminatory policies of many countries
around the world."

See also
========

-   *List of female lieutenant governors in the United States*

-   *Women in the United States Senate*

List of female lieutenant governors in the United States

Women in the United States Senate

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Tina Smith at Curlie*

-   *Tina Smith for U.S. Senate official campaign site*

-   *Senator Tina Smith official government site*

U.S. Senator Tina Smith official government site

Tina Smith for U.S. Senate official campaign site

Tina Smith at Curlie

Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress

Profile at Vote Smart

Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election
Commission

Legislation sponsored at the Library of Congress
