**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trump%20International%20Hotel%20and%20Tower%20%28Vancouver%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Trump International Hotel and Tower (Vancouver)
===============================================

-   *The Trump International Hotel and Tower Vancouver is a skyscraper
    in Downtown Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.*

-   *The Trump Tower is the second tallest building in the city, after
    the Shangri-La tower located across West Georgia Street.*

The Trump International Hotel and Tower Vancouver is a skyscraper in
Downtown Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The 63-storey, 187.8-metre
(616 ft), mixed-use tower is located at 1151 West Georgia Street, and
was completed in 2016. The Trump Tower is the second tallest building in
the city, after the Shangri-La tower located across West Georgia Street.

The tower, designed by architect Arthur Erickson, is triangular in
shape, twisting gradually with height up to 45 degrees from bottom to
top. The building is described as having a 'hyperbolic paraboloid' form;
the design is similar to the Absolute Tower in Mississauga, Ontario and
Turning Torso in Malmö, Sweden. The developer, Holborn Group, is aiming
for LEED Silver certification for the building. Holborn is backed
financially by Tony Tiah Thee Kian, chairman of TA Enterprise. The
nine-level derelict building formerly occupying the site was demolished.

History
=======

-   *The building consists of the Trump Hotel on the first 15 floors,
    topped by 217 condos on the remaining floors.*

-   *In 2013 at a local press conference, Holborn Group president Joo
    Kim Tiah, developer of the site, along with the Trump Organization
    president Donald Trump, accompanied by his three children Donald
    Jr., Ivanka, and Eric, unveiled the \$360 million Trump
    International Hotel & Tower Vancouver.*

The initial project was cancelled on February 25, 2009. Buyers who
purchased luxury condos in the tower received letters informing them of
the project's cancellation. On June 1, 2009, Holborn Group president Joo
Kim Tiah said his company still wanted to see the plan completed on the
prime downtown site—if the City of Vancouver wanted to work with him.

On August 21, 2009, it was announced that the project would definitely
resume, possibly as an even taller building (pending approval from the
city) while keeping the same design by Arthur Erickson. Work on the
project would resume as soon as early 2010, after the Winter Olympics
(construction work was not permitted during the Olympics). However, it
was not certain as of August 21, 2009, if the Ritz-Carlton "brand" would
still remain associated with the project. Developers announced August
27, 2009, that the project will proceed. They are re-proposing the
project, requesting a height increase from 182.9 metres (600 ft) to
187.8 metres (616 ft). The proposal called for a higher number of
smaller housing units with a more efficient use of floor space while
keeping the exterior of the tower aesthetically unchanged (outside of
the height increase). The new proposal went through a series of public
hearings before Vancouver city council was scheduled to vote on it in
November 2009.

The project was finally revitalized in mid-2011 without Ritz-Carlton as
the hotelier. The tower was redesigned from 58 to 67 storeys and an
additional 2 floors of underground parking. In mid-2012, the new hotel
tenant was announced to be Marriott. Excavation recommenced in the
spring of 2012, with actual construction work beginning in August. By
November 2012, the foundation had been completed and substantial
construction had commenced, with half of the first floor of parking
being completed.

In 2013 at a local press conference, Holborn Group president Joo Kim
Tiah, developer of the site, along with the Trump Organization president
Donald Trump, accompanied by his three children Donald Jr., Ivanka, and
Eric, unveiled the \$360 million Trump International Hotel & Tower
Vancouver.

The 63-story condo and hotel complex opened on February 28, 2017, with
Donald Jr. and Eric Trump joined by developer Joo Kim Tiah. The opening
was met with public protests and a boycott of the ceremony by Mayor
Robertson and other local politicians. The building consists of the
Trump Hotel on the first 15 floors, topped by 217 condos on the
remaining floors.

On March 1, 2018, CNN reported that the FBI has opened a
counterintelligence investigation into Ivanka Trump; scrutinizing her
international business deals at the tower.

Hotel
=====

-   *The 147-room Trump Hotel, located on the first 15 floors of the
    building, will also include a champagne lounge, signature
    restaurant, 560-square-metre (6,000 sq ft) Trump Spa, and
    1,400-square-metre (15,000 sq ft) of meeting and event space.*

-   *The hotel will also feature Vancouver's first pool bar nightclub.*

The 147-room Trump Hotel, located on the first 15 floors of the
building, will also include a champagne lounge, signature restaurant,
560-square-metre (6,000 sq ft) Trump Spa, and 1,400-square-metre
(15,000 sq ft) of meeting and event space. The hotel will also feature
Vancouver's first pool bar nightclub.

Reception
=========

-   *Similar movements occurred in Toronto, which led to the Trump
    International Hotel and Tower, Toronto being purchased for
    renovation and renaming in 2017.*

-   *On December 15, 2015, Vancouver mayor Gregor Robertson wrote a
    letter to the developers of the Trump Tower Vancouver to remove
    Donald Trump's name from the building.*

On December 15, 2015, Vancouver mayor Gregor Robertson wrote a letter to
the developers of the Trump Tower Vancouver to remove Donald Trump's
name from the building. Robertson stated that "Trump’s name and brand
have no more place on Vancouver’s skyline than his ignorant ideas have
in the modern world." A petition to remove the name was also mentioned
in the letter, with more than 50,000 residents voicing their concerns.
British Columbia Premier Christy Clark agreed with the movement, stating
that "Donald Trump doesn’t represent our city." Similar movements
occurred in Toronto, which led to the Trump International Hotel and
Tower, Toronto being purchased for renovation and renaming in 2017.

See also
========

-   *Al Hamra Tower, a twisted building*

-   *List of things named after Donald Trump*

-   *List of tallest buildings in Vancouver*

List of condominiums in Canada

List of tallest buildings in Vancouver

List of things named after Donald Trump

List of twisted buildings

Capital Gate, a twisted building

Al Hamra Tower, a twisted building

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *and Mail Article - Trump Brand Arrives in Vancouver |Globe and Mail
    Article - Trump Brand Arrives in Vancouver*

-   *Trump Vancouver Presale Condo Information*

Trump Vancouver Presale Condo Information

City of Vancouver building proposal (PDF, includes pictures; accessed on
January 28, 2006)

Emporis Listing

Vancouver Sun Article - Project Dead

and Mail Article - Trump Brand Arrives in Vancouver |Globe and Mail
Article - Trump Brand Arrives in Vancouver
