**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/U.S.%20News%20%26%20World%20Report\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

U.S. News & World Report
========================

-   *U.S. News is best known today for its influential Best Colleges and
    Best Hospitals rankings, but it has expanded its content and product
    offerings in education, health, money, careers, travel, and cars.*

-   *U.S. News & World Report is an American media company that
    publishes news, opinion, consumer advice, rankings, and analysis.*

U.S. News & World Report is an American media company that publishes
news, opinion, consumer advice, rankings, and analysis. Founded as a
newsweekly magazine in 1933, U.S. News transitioned to primarily
web-based publishing in 2010. U.S. News is best known today for its
influential Best Colleges and Best Hospitals rankings, but it has
expanded its content and product offerings in education, health, money,
careers, travel, and cars. The rankings are popular in North America but
have drawn widespread criticism from colleges, administrations, and
students for their dubious, disparate, and arbitrary nature.

History
=======

-   *Additional rankings published by U.S. News & World Report include
    hospitals, medical specialties and automobiles.*

-   *Prior to going defunct, U.S. News was the lowest-ranking news
    magazine in the U.S., after Time and Newsweek.*

-   *The two magazines covered national and international news
    separately, but Lawrence merged them into U.S. News & World Report
    in 1948.*

United States News was founded in 1933 by David Lawrence (1888–1973),
who also started World Report in 1946. The two magazines covered
national and international news separately, but Lawrence merged them
into U.S. News & World Report in 1948. He subsequently sold the magazine
to his employees. Historically, the magazine tended to be slightly more
conservative than its two primary competitors, Time and Newsweek, and
focused more on economic, health, and education stories. It also
eschewed sports, entertainment, and celebrity news. Important milestones
in the early history of the magazine include the introduction of the
"Washington Whispers" column in 1934 and the "News You Can Use" column
in 1952. In 1958, the weekly magazine's circulation passed one million
and reached two million by 1973.

Since 1983, it has become known primarily for its influential ranking
and annual reports of colleges and graduate schools, spanning across
most fields and subjects. U.S. News & World Report is America's oldest
and best-known ranker of academic institutions, and covers the fields of
business, law, medicine, engineering, education, social sciences and
public affairs, in addition to many other areas. Its print edition was
consistently included in national bestseller lists, augmented by online
subscriptions. Additional rankings published by U.S. News & World Report
include hospitals, medical specialties and automobiles.

In October 1984, publisher and real estate developer Mortimer Zuckerman
purchased U.S. News & World Report. Zuckerman is also formerly the owner
of the New York Daily News. In 1993, U.S. News & World Report entered
the digital world by providing content to CompuServe and in 1995, the
website usnews.com was launched. In 2001, the website won the National
Magazine Award for General Excellence Online. In 2007, U.S. News & World
Report published its first list of the nation's best high schools. Its
ranking methodology includes state test scores and the success of poor
and minority students on these exams, and schools' performance in
Advanced Placement exams.

Starting in June 2008, the magazine reduced its publication frequency in
three steps. In June 2008, citing the decline overall magazine
circulation and advertising, U.S. News & World Report announced that it
would become a biweekly publication, starting January 2009. It hoped
advertisers would be attracted to the schedule, which allowed ads to
stay on newsstands a week longer. However, five months later the
magazine changed its frequency again, becoming monthly. In August 2008,
U.S. News expanded and revamped its online opinion section. The new
version of the opinion page included daily new op-ed content as well as
the new Thomas Jefferson Street blog. An internal memo was sent on
November 5, 2010, to the staff of the magazine informing them that the
"December issue will be our last print monthly sent to subscribers,
whose remaining print and digital replica subscriptions will be filled
by other publishers." The memo went on to say that the publication would
be moving to a primarily digital format but that it would continue to
print special issues such as "the college and grad guides, as well as
hospital and personal finance guides." Prior to going defunct, U.S. News
was the lowest-ranking news magazine in the U.S., after Time and
Newsweek. A weekly digital magazine, U.S. News Weekly, introduced in
January 2009, continued to offer subscription content until it ceased at
the end of April 2015.

The company is owned by U.S. News & World Report, L.P., a privately held
company based in the Daily News building in New York City. The editorial
staff is headquartered in Washington, D.C. The company's move to the Web
made it possible for U.S. News & World Report to expand its service
journalism with the introduction of several consumer-facing rankings
products. The company returned to profitability in 2013. The editorial
staff of U.S. News & World Report is based in Washington, D.C. and Brian
Kelly has been the chief content officer since April 2007. The company
is owned by media proprietor Mortimer Zuckerman.

Rankings
========

Who Runs America?
=================

-   *The first of the U.S. News & World Report's famous rankings was its
    "Who Runs America?"*

The first of the U.S. News & World Report's famous rankings was its "Who
Runs America?" surveys. These ran in the spring of each year from 1974
to 1986. The magazine would have a cover typically featuring persons
selected by the USN & WR as being the ten most powerful persons in the
United States. Every single edition of the series listed the President
of the United States as the most powerful person, but the \#2 position
included such persons as Secretary of State Henry Kissinger (1974),
Federal Reserve Chairmen Paul Volcker and Arthur Burns (each listed
multiple years) and US Senator Edward Kennedy (1979). While most of the
top ten each year were officials in government, occasionally others were
included, including TV anchormen Walter Cronkite and Dan Rather, Chase
Manhattan Bank Chairman David Rockefeller, AFL-CIO leader George Meany,
and consumer advocate Ralph Nader. The only woman to make the top ten
list was First Lady Rosalynn Carter in 1980.

In addition to these overall top ten persons, the publication also
included top persons in each of several fields, including Education,
Business, Finance, Journalism, and many other areas. The survey was
discontinued after 1986.

Best colleges
=============

-   *In 1983, U.S. News & World Report published its first "America's
    Best Colleges" report.*

-   *Robert Morse created the U.S. News Best Colleges rankings
    methodology, and continues to oversee its application as chief data
    strategist at U.S. News.*

-   *U.S. News & World Report continues to publish comprehensive college
    guides in book form.*

In 1983, U.S. News & World Report published its first "America's Best
Colleges" report. The rankings have been compiled and published annually
since 1987. These rankings are based upon data that U.S. News & World
Report collects from each educational institution from an annual survey
sent to each school. The rankings are also based upon opinion surveys of
university faculties and administrators who do not belong to the
schools. In addition to colleges, U.S. News & World Report also ranks
graduate schools and academic programs in a number of specific
disciplines, including business, law, engineering, nursing, and
medicine.

The popularity of U.S. News & World Report's Best Colleges rankings is
reflected in its 2014 release, which brought 2.6 million unique visitors
and 18.9 million page views to usnews.com in one day. Traffic came from
over 3,000 sites, including Facebook and Google. U.S. News & World
Report continues to publish comprehensive college guides in book form.
Robert Morse created the U.S. News Best Colleges rankings methodology,
and continues to oversee its application as chief data strategist at
U.S. News. In 2014, The Washington Post featured a profile of Morse,
exploring his 30-year career with the publication.

Criticism
=========

-   *During the 1990s, several educational institutions in the United
    States were involved in a movement to boycott the U.S. News & World
    Report college rankings survey.*

-   *SAT scores play a role in The U.S. News & World Report college
    rankings even though U.S. News is not empowered with the ability to
    formally verify or recalculate the scores that are represented to
    them by schools.*

-   *News."*

During the 1990s, several educational institutions in the United States
were involved in a movement to boycott the U.S. News & World Report
college rankings survey. The first was Reed College, which stopped
submitting the survey in 1995. The survey was also criticized by Alma
College, Stanford University, and St. John's College during the late
1990s. SAT scores play a role in The U.S. News & World Report college
rankings even though U.S. News is not empowered with the ability to
formally verify or recalculate the scores that are represented to them
by schools. Since the mid-1990s there have been many instances
documented by the popular press wherein schools lied about their SAT
scores in order to obtain a higher ranking. An exposé in the San
Francisco Chronicle stated that the elements in the methodology of U.S
News & World Report's rankings are redundant and can be reduced to one
thing: money. On June 19, 2007, during the annual meeting of the
Annapolis Group, members discussed the letter to college presidents
asking them not to participate in the "reputation survey" section of the
U.S. News & World Report survey (this section comprises 25% of the
ranking).

As a result, "a majority of the approximately 80 presidents at the
meeting said that they did not intend to participate in the U.S. News
reputational rankings in the future." The statement also said that its
members "have agreed to participate in the development of an alternative
common format that presents information about their colleges for
students and their families to use in the college search process." This
database will be web-based and developed in conjunction with
higher-education organizations including the National Association of
Independent Colleges and Universities (NAICU) and the Council of
Independent Colleges.

On June 22, 2007, U.S. News & World Report editor Robert Morse issued a
response in which he argued, "in terms of the peer assessment survey, we
at U.S. News firmly believe the survey has significant value because it
allows us to measure the 'intangibles' of a college that we can't
measure through statistical data. Plus, the reputation of a school can
help get that all-important first job and plays a key part in which grad
school someone will be able to get into. The peer survey is by nature
subjective, but the technique of asking industry leaders to rate their
competitors is a commonly accepted practice. The results from the peer
survey also can act to level the playing field between private and
public colleges." In reference to the alternative database discussed by
the Annapolis Group, Morse also argued, "It's important to point out
that the Annapolis Group's stated goal of presenting college data in a
common format has been tried before \[...\] U.S. News has been supplying
this exact college information for many years already. And it appears
that NAICU will be doing it with significantly less comparability and
functionality. U.S. News first collects all these data (using an
agreed-upon set of definitions from the Common Data Set). Then we post
the data on our website in easily accessible, comparable tables. In
other words, the Annapolis Group and the others in the NAICU initiative
actually are following the lead of U.S. News."

Some higher education experts, such as Kevin Carey of Education Sector,
have asserted that U.S. News & World Report's college rankings system is
merely a list of criteria that mirrors the superficial characteristics
of elite colleges and universities. According to Carey, the U.S. News
ranking system is deeply flawed. Instead of focusing on the fundamental
issues of how well colleges and universities educate their students and
how well they prepare them to be successful after college, the
magazine's rankings are almost entirely a function of three factors:
fame, wealth, and exclusivity. He suggests that there are more important
characteristics parents and students should research to select colleges,
such as how well students are learning and how likely students are to
earn a degree.

The question of college rankings and their impact on admissions gained
greater attention in March 2007, when Dr. Michele Tolela Myers (the
former President of Sarah Lawrence College) shared in an op-ed that the
U.S. News & World Report, when not given SAT scores for a university,
chooses to simply rank the college with an invented SAT score of
approximately one standard deviation (roughly 200 SAT points) behind
those of peer colleges, with the reasoning being that SAT-optional
universities will, because of their test-optional nature, accept higher
numbers of less academically capable students.

In a 2011 article regarding the Sarah Lawrence controversy, Peter Sacks
of The Huffington Post criticized the U.S. News rankings' centering on
test scores and denounced the magazine's "best colleges" list as a scam:

Best global universities
========================

-   *In October 2014, the U.S. News & World Report published its
    inaugural "Best Global Universities" rankings.*

-   *Inside Higher Ed noted that the U.S. News is entering into the
    international college and university rankings area that is already
    "dominated by three major global university rankings," namely the
    Times Higher Education World University Rankings, the Academic
    Ranking of World Universities, and the QS World University
    Rankings.*

In October 2014, the U.S. News & World Report published its inaugural
"Best Global Universities" rankings. Inside Higher Ed noted that the
U.S. News is entering into the international college and university
rankings area that is already "dominated by three major global
university rankings," namely the Times Higher Education World University
Rankings, the Academic Ranking of World Universities, and the QS World
University Rankings. Robert Morse stated that "it's natural for U.S.
News to get into this space." Morse also noted that the U.S. News "will
also be the first American publisher to enter the global rankings
space."

Best hospitals
==============

-   *In addition to rankings for each of these specialties, hospitals
    that excel in many U.S. News areas are ranked in the Honor Roll.*

-   *Since 1990, U.S. News & World Report has compiled the Best
    Hospitals rankings.*

Since 1990, U.S. News & World Report has compiled the Best Hospitals
rankings. The Best Hospitals rankings are specifically based on a
different methodology that looks at difficult (high acuity) cases within
16 specialties, including cancer; diabetes and endocrinology; ear, nose
and throat; gastroenterology; geriatrics; gynecology; heart and heart
surgery; kidney disorders; neurology and neurosurgery; ophthalmology;
orthopedics; psychiatry; pulmonology; rehabilitation; rheumatology; and
urology. In addition to rankings for each of these specialties,
hospitals that excel in many U.S. News areas are ranked in the Honor
Roll.

Best cars
=========

-   *U.S. News also produces annual "Best Cars for the Money" and "Best
    Cars for Families" awards across approximately 20 classes of cars,
    trucks, SUVs, and minivans.*

-   *Since 2007, U.S. News has developed an innovative rankings system
    for new and used automobiles.*

Since 2007, U.S. News has developed an innovative rankings system for
new and used automobiles. The rankings span over 30 classes of cars,
trucks, SUVs, minivans, wagons, and sports cars. Each automobile
receives an overall score, as well as a performance, interior, and
recommendation score to the nearest tenth on a 1-10 scale. Scores are
based on the consensus opinion of America's trusted automotive experts,
as well as reliability and safety data. U.S. News also produces annual
"Best Cars for the Money" and "Best Cars for Families" awards across
approximately 20 classes of cars, trucks, SUVs, and minivans. Money
award winners are derived by combining vehicle price and five-year cost
of ownership with the opinion of the automotive press, while family
awards are tabulated by combining critics' opinions with the vehicle's
availability of family-friendly features and interior space, as well as
safety and reliability data. Money and family award winners are
announced in February and March of each year, respectively.

Best states
===========

-   *In 2017, U.S. News published its first ranking of all 50 U.S.
    states, incorporating metrics in seven categories: health care,
    education, crime and corrections, infrastructure, opportunity,
    economy, and government.*

In 2017, U.S. News published its first ranking of all 50 U.S. states,
incorporating metrics in seven categories: health care, education, crime
and corrections, infrastructure, opportunity, economy, and government.
The weighting of the individual categories in determining overall rank
was informed by surveys on what matters most to residents. Massachusetts
occupies the top rank of the 2017 list, with an overall \#2 ranking in
health care and \#1 ranking in education.

See also
========

-   *Washington Monthly*

Washington Monthly

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Compiled List of Rankings from 1991-2001 (Excel document)*

Official website

Compiled List of Rankings from 1991-2001 (Excel document)
