**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/University%20of%20Nevada%2C%20Las%20Vegas\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

University of Nevada, Las Vegas
===============================

-   *The university includes the Shadow Lane Campus, just east of the
    University Medical Center of Southern Nevada, which houses both
    School of Medicine and School of Dental Medicine— the only dental
    school in Nevada.*

-   *The University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) is a public research
    university in the Las Vegas suburb of Paradise, Nevada.*

The University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) is a public research
university in the Las Vegas suburb of Paradise, Nevada. The 332-acre
(134 ha) campus is about 1.6 mi (2.6 km) east of the Las Vegas Strip. It
was formerly part of the University of Nevada from 1957 to 1969. The
university includes the Shadow Lane Campus, just east of the University
Medical Center of Southern Nevada, which houses both School of Medicine
and School of Dental Medicine— the only dental school in Nevada. UNLV's
law school, the William S. Boyd School of Law, is also the only law
school in the state.

UNLV is a land-grant university and classified as "R1: Doctoral
Universities - Very high research activity" by the Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education framework. The
William F. Harrah College of Hotel Administration is annually ranked
among the top hospitality programs in the United States due in part to
the university's proximity to the Las Vegas Strip. Its Thomas & Mack
Center hosted the 2007 NBA All-Star Game, concerts and lectures by Bill
Clinton and Mikhail Gorbachev as part of various UNLV-affiliated lecture
series.

History
=======

-   *In 1969, the board of regents approved the name University of
    Nevada, Las Vegas and the abbreviation UNLV.*

-   *The first college classes, which eventually became the classes of
    UNLV, were offered as the southern regional extension division of
    the University of Nevada, in 1959 in a classroom at Las Vegas High
    School.*

The first college classes, which eventually became the classes of UNLV,
were offered as the southern regional extension division of the
University of Nevada, in 1959 in a classroom at Las Vegas High School.
In 1955, State Senator Mahlon Brown "sponsored the legislation to
provide \$200,000 to construct the campus's first building" - Frazier
Hall. Groundbreaking on the original 60-acre (24 ha) site was in April
1956, and the university purchased a 640-acre (260 ha) site in North Las
Vegas for future expansion. UNLV was officially founded by the Nevada
Board of Regents as the Southern Division of the University of Nevada on
September 10, 1957. The first classes were held on the current campus in
the post and beam Mid Century Modern Maude Frazier Hall designed by the
local architectural firm, Zick & Sharp. Twenty-nine students graduated
in the first commencement ceremonies in 1964.

In 1965, the Nevada Legislature named the school Nevada Southern
University, and the Board of Regents hired the campus's first president,
Donald C. Moyer. who died in 2008 at the age of 88.

In 1968, Nevada Southern was given equal status with its parent
institution in Reno, and the present name was approved by the regents in
January 1969, during a winter session and without input from
representatives from the University of Nevada, Reno. During this time,
Nevada Southern University also adopted the southern "Rebel" athletics
moniker and a mascot dressed in a southern Confederate uniform named
Beauregard. The popular reasoning behind such a controversial moniker
and mascot is that they did it to oppose the northern Union traditions
and symbols of their northern rival, the University of Nevada. Soon,
protests from NSU/UNLV students forced a slight change to their
Confederate mascot, but the "Rebels" moniker remains to this day. Since
its founding, the university has grown rapidly, expanding both its
academic programs and campus facilities.

In 1969, the board of regents approved the name University of Nevada,
Las Vegas and the abbreviation UNLV.

In 1973, Jerry Tarkanian was hired as the men's basketball coach by
UNLV's second president, Roman Zorn.

The Center for Business and Economic Research was established in 1975
for research projects that assist in the development of the Nevada
economy and assist state and local agencies and private-sector
enterprises in the collection and analysis of economic and market data.

In 1981, Claes Oldenburg's Flashlight sculpture was installed on the
plaza between Artemus Ham Hall and Judy Bayley Theatre.

The Lied Institute for Real Estate Studies was established in 1989.

In 2001, The School of Dental Medicine opened to train students, and to
offer low-cost dental care to residents. Also, the Lied Library on
campus opened.

In 2003, the Institute for Security Studies was established to address
homeland security concerns. The Lynn Bennett Childhood Development
Center opened.

In 2004, UNLV opened its first regional campus on Shadow Lane, near the
University Medical Center. The School of Dental Medicine is located on
the Shadow Lane Campus. Also, the School of Public Health was
established in the Division of Health Sciences to address new and
emerging public-health issues.

In 2005, construction began on the \$113 million science and engineering
building, which has 200,000 square feet of teaching space, laboratories,
and high-tech conference rooms. The building, completed in 2008, was
designed to support interdisciplinary research; draw students to
high-demand fields such as electrical engineering, computer science, and
environmental science; and attract national and international
researchers. UNLV launched its first comprehensive campaign, Invent the
Future, with the goal of raising \$500 million by December 2008. Also,
the Air Force ROTC program was established on campus.

In 2006, The Nevada System of Higher Education Board of Regents raised
the minimum GPA to 3.0 for admittance to UNLV. UNLV opened its first
international campus in Singapore, where the William F. Harrah College
of Hotel Administration offered a bachelor's degree program in
hospitality management. UNLV planned to end its partnership with the
Singapore Institute of Technology by 2015, due to economic issues such
as rising tuition in Las Vegas and the falling value of the U.S. dollar
in Singapore.

In 2007, an expanded student union (with study and social lounges,
eateries, a new ballroom, a 300-seat theater and a new student
recreation center (with high-tech weight and fitness rooms, swimming
pools, and a juice bar) opened in the fall. These facilities reflected
UNLV's goal of becoming more student-centered. The Greenspun College of
Urban Affairs broke ground for the \$94 million Greenspun Hall, which
showcased the latest environmental and technological advancements and
served as an anchor for "Midtown UNLV."

In 2011, UNLV's business college was formally renamed after a \$15
million donation from the Ted and Doris Lee family, the Las Vegas real
estate, hotel, restaurant, and casino investors.

In 2016, UNLV hosted the final presidential debate between Hillary
Clinton and Donald Trump. The Hank Greenspun School of Journalism and
Media Studies covered the debate on their local station UNLV-TV. This
featured a three-hour-live broadcast of round-table student commentary,
interviews, and coverage from the spin room inside the Thomas and Mack
Center.

In 2018, UNLV President Len Jessup had received unfavorable performance
reviews from the system chancellor and was on his way out. Ethical
concerns were raised after a \$14 million donation was discovered to be
conditioned on his continual employment.

In 2019, UNLV renamed the School of Community Health Sciences as the
School of Public Health. This was a result of the school becoming the
first and only accredited School of Public Health in Nevada, earning
this distinction through the Council on Education for Public Health.

Organization
============

-   *College of Sciences*

-   *Graduate College*

-   *Honors College*

-   *School of Medicine*

-   *School of Music*

-   *College of Education*

-   *School of Architecture*

UNLV offers more than 350 bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees in
varying fields, which are taught by 850 faculty members.

Academic schools, colleges and divisions:

School of Allied Health Sciences

School of Architecture

School of Public Health

College of Education

Howard R. Hughes College of Engineering

College Fine Arts

Graduate College

Honors College

William F. Harrah College of Hotel Administration

Hank Greenspun School of Journalism & Media Studies

College of Liberal Arts

School of Music

College of Sciences

Greenspun College of Urban Affairs

School of Public Policy and Leadership

School of Environment and Public Affairs

Professional schools:

Lee Business School

School of Dental Medicine

William S. Boyd School of Law

School of Medicine

School of Nursing

School of Social Work

Research
========

-   *UNLV research and economic development activities increased for the
    fourth consecutive year, according to the fiscal-year-end report
    from the Division of Research and Economic Development.*

-   *UNLV's economic development activities continue to grow.*

-   *UNLV doctoral conferrals increased nearly 13% in FY16 to 166
    degrees conferred.*

UNLV research and economic development activities increased for the
fourth consecutive year, according to the fiscal-year-end report from
the Division of Research and Economic Development. Research awards rose
by 7.5 percent to nearly \$34.5 million, and proposals increased by two
percent. Total sponsored program expenditures held steady from FY2015 at
roughly \$49.2 million.

The College of Sciences received the largest amount of award funding
among the colleges once again this fiscal year: nearly \$15 million
through more than 100 awards. Engineering followed with roughly \$7.6
million in awards. The College of Education posted the largest
percentage gain in award funding in FY16 with a nearly 47% increase from
\$1,776,332 in FY15 to \$2,609,366 in FY16.

UNLV's economic development activities continue to grow. Sixty-one
patents were filed in FY16, an increase of 17% over FY15, and licensing
revenue doubled from \$126,242 in FY15 to \$252,309 in FY16.

Another measure of university research activity is the number of
doctoral degrees conferred, as doctoral programs require a strong
research component culminating in the doctoral dissertation. UNLV
doctoral conferrals increased nearly 13% in FY16 to 166 degrees
conferred.

Undergraduate admissions
========================

-   *UNLV's admissions process is considered "selective" according to
    U.S. News & World Report.*

-   *The average high school grade point average was 3.31.*

UNLV's admissions process is considered "selective" according to U.S.
News & World Report. For freshmen entering fall 2016, 7,064 were
accepted out of 8,533 applicants, an 82.8% acceptance rate, and 3,859
enrolled. Women constituted 58.4% of the incoming class; men were 41.6%.

Among freshman students who enrolled in fall 2016, SAT scores for the
middle 50% ranged from 450-560 for critical reading, 450-570 for math,
and 430-540 for writing. ACT composite scores for the middle 50% ranged
from 19–24. In terms of class rank, 20% of enrolled freshmen were in the
top 10% of their high school classes; 52% ranked in the top quarter, and
82% ranked in the top half. The average high school grade point average
was 3.31.

Rankings
========

-   *In 2018, UNLV surpassed New York University as the most diverse
    university for undergraduates according to U.S. News & World
    Report.*

According to QS, William F. Harrah College of Hospitality's Hotel
Administration program is ranked as \#1 in 2017 and 2018.

Lee Business School's part-time MBA program is ranked in the top 28% in
U.S. News & World Report's 2014 ranking of best business graduate
programs.

The Atlantic recognized UNLV's English department as having one of the
nation's most innovative master of fine arts programs and one of the
top-five doctoral programs in creative writing.

Down Beat magazine, the internationally recognized industry standard
trade publication for jazz music, recognized the work of the 2010 UNLV
Jazz Ensemble as "Outstanding Large Jazz Ensemble Performance" among
graduate college-level jazz bands in their annual Student Music Award
issue of that year.

In 2018, UNLV surpassed New York University as the most diverse
university for undergraduates according to U.S. News & World Report.

Student life
============

-   *Much of the student life at UNLV revolves around its Student Union,
    which houses the offices for its student government and student
    organizations on its third floor.*

Much of the student life at UNLV revolves around its Student Union,
which houses the offices for its student government and student
organizations on its third floor.

Student government
==================

-   *The Consolidated Students of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas
    (CSUN) is the undergraduate student government at UNLV.*

-   *The graduate student government at UNLV is separate from the
    undergraduate student government.*

-   *The Graduate and Professional Student Association is the graduate
    student government at UNLV.*

The Consolidated Students of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (CSUN)
is the undergraduate student government at UNLV. This body consists of
an executive board, a senate of 25 members from all of the colleges at
UNLV, a judicial council, and directors who plan and organize events and
marketing. CSUN currently has an annual budget of about \$1 million,
funded through student fees. The senate ways and means committee
determines how that the CSUN budget will be divided to be set aside for
such items as student organization funding and scholarships. The final
say on spending in CSUN is the senate.

Together with UNLV, CSUN founded an on-campus preschool in 1974 as part
of the College of Education. Both students and staff can use this
accredited preschool.

The graduate student government at UNLV is separate from the
undergraduate student government. The Graduate and Professional Student
Association is the graduate student government at UNLV.

Student organizations
=====================

-   *To become official, the organization must become recognized by
    UNLV's Office of Civic Engagement and Diversity.*

-   *According to U.S. News, UNLV has over 250 student organizations.*

According to U.S. News, UNLV has over 250 student organizations. To
become official, the organization must become recognized by UNLV's
Office of Civic Engagement and Diversity.

Newspaper
=========

-   *It covers many topics about higher education in UNLV and the
    state.*

-   *The Scarlet and Gray Free Press is the student newspaper on
    campus.*

The Scarlet and Gray Free Press is the student newspaper on campus. It
covers many topics about higher education in UNLV and the state. The
paper extensively covers CSUN senate meetings and elections. It is
printed twice weekly and posts its articles online. Recently, the
newspaper's name was changed from Rebel Yell to its current iteration,
as the former title was criticized for its reference to Confederate
culture.

Greek life
==========

Campus
======

-   *Midtown UNLV is an ongoing private-public development along
    Maryland Parkway, a border street to the school.*

-   *The main campus of UNLV is on a 332-acre land grant in centrally
    located Paradise, Nevada.*

-   *Development began in 2002 and its purpose is to expand the
    university to meet the demands of a major university in the Las
    Vegas metropolitan area.*

The main campus of UNLV is on a 332-acre land grant in centrally located
Paradise, Nevada.

Midtown UNLV is an ongoing private-public development along Maryland
Parkway, a border street to the school. Development began in 2002 and
its purpose is to expand the university to meet the demands of a major
university in the Las Vegas metropolitan area. The project to improve
the "front door" of the university by improving amenities for students
and businesses along Maryland Parkway. The goals are to reduce vacant
spaces, lower business turnover rates, and create space for the
university to expand. Additionally, the project aims to create new
housing developments close to campus. Major funding is through state
funding sources along with private donations.

Sustainability
==============

-   *In the 2009 edition of the Sustainable Endowment Institute's
    College Sustainability Report Card, University of Nevada-Las Vegas
    received a grade of "C".*

-   *The University of Nevada, Las Vegas has created an Urban
    Sustainability Initiative that strives to implement sustainable
    practices on campus and in the larger Las Vegas community.*

The University of Nevada, Las Vegas has created an Urban Sustainability
Initiative that strives to implement sustainable practices on campus and
in the larger Las Vegas community. In addition to having two campus
buildings in the process of LEED Silver Certification and one building
in the process of LEED Gold Certification, UNLV has reduced its use of
electricity and natural gas by 38% per square foot since 2001 by
retrofitting older campus buildings. In the 2009 edition of the
Sustainable Endowment Institute's College Sustainability Report Card,
University of Nevada-Las Vegas received a grade of "C".

The Science and Engineering building received a LEED Silver rating in
March 2009. SEB achieved this rating by using recycled glass, steel,
concrete, and wood. More than 60% of the leftover construction materials
were recycled. The roof of SEB was made to reflect 92% of sunlight. This
reduces the amount of heat absorbed into the building, so reduces energy
needed to cool the building. Incoming air to SEB is also cooled through
evaporation so the need for air conditioning is reduced.
High-performance window glazing also allows light to come in while
keeping the building insulated. Occupancy sensors allow lights to
automatically turn off when a room is not occupied, saving electricity.
Low-flow sinks, toilets, and showers, as well as a drip irrigation
system for the native desert landscape, reduce water usage by 42%. SEB
also uses a reclaimed water system that captures wastewater, providing
750 gallons of water a day that are used to flush toilets.

The Greenspun College of Urban Affairs building of UNLV received a LEED
Gold rating in April 2010.

In 2009, UNLV received the Cashman Good Government Award for the campus'
sustainability measures for "maintaining consistent energy costs despite
substantial campus growth," saving nearly \$11 million from 2001-2009.
UNLV was also recognized for managing the xeric demonstration garden and
for its recycling efforts.

Recent efforts by the university to improve sustainability practices
include participation in the Solar Decathlon and creation of a
Sustainability Coordinator position to investigate methods for improving
sustainability of residence halls.

Residence halls
===============

-   *Four residence-hall complexes are on the campus: Dayton Complex,
    Tonopah Complex, South Residential Complex, and Upper Class
    Complex.*

Four residence-hall complexes are on the campus: Dayton Complex, Tonopah
Complex, South Residential Complex, and Upper Class Complex.

Libraries
=========

-   *The Architecture Studies Library in the UNLV School of
    Architecture*

-   *UNLV has several libraries on the main campus.*

-   *The biggest is the Lied Library in the center of campus.*

UNLV has several libraries on the main campus. The biggest is the Lied
Library in the center of campus. Opened in 2001, the 301,000-square-foot
(28,000 m2), \$58 million facility is named for real estate entrepreneur
Ernst W. Lied.

Many colleges also have their individual libraries that hold materials
more closely related to the college:

The Architecture Studies Library in the UNLV School of Architecture

The Teacher Development & Resources Library in the College of Education

The Music Library in the Lee & Thomas Beam Music Center

The Wiener-Rogers Law Library in the William S. Boyd School of Law

Athletic facilities
===================

-   *These facilities hold home games for UNLV sports programs and have
    hosted events such as the Mountain West Conference Basketball
    Tournament and the National Finals Rodeo.*

-   *It caters to the needs of UNLV students' physical and mental
    health.*

-   *Most recently, the Mendenhall Center, a training center dedicated
    for the UNLV basketball program, opened in 2012.*

UNLV's main athletic facilities include Sam Boyd Stadium, Thomas & Mack
Center (1983), Cox Pavilion, Buchanan Natatorium, and Earl Wilson
Stadium. These facilities hold home games for UNLV sports programs and
have hosted events such as the Mountain West Conference Basketball
Tournament and the National Finals Rodeo.

In 2007, the 188,000 sq ft (17,500 m2) recreation center was completed.
It caters to the needs of UNLV students' physical and mental health.

Most recently, the Mendenhall Center, a training center dedicated for
the UNLV basketball program, opened in 2012.

Other notable buildings
=======================

-   *Certified under the LEEDrating system, the building was named after
    Las Vegas Sun founder and publisher Hank Greenspun.*

-   *It was created to serve both the College of Sciences and the
    Howard R. Hughes College of Engineering in an environmentally
    friendly manner.*

Performing arts facilities include the Judy Bayley Theatre (1972), the
Artemus W. Ham Concert Hall (1976), the Black Box Theatre, the Alta Ham
Fine Arts Complex (1982), and the Lee and Thomas Beam Music Center
(2001).

In 1997, the Paul B. Sogg Architecture Building opened.

In 2007, a new 135,000 sq ft (12,500 m2) student union was opened. This
building offers many amenities for students including a social
atmosphere, a diverse food court, conference rooms, a game room, student
government offices, and student organization offices.

One of the newer buildings on campus, the Greenspun Hall, opened its
doors in 2008. Home to the Greenspun College of Urban Affairs and the
Brookings Mountain West Institute, this five-story, 120,000-square-foot
building is home to state-of-the art media facilities. It also houses
the campus radio station KUNV-FM, student-run HD2 radio station, and the
television station, UNLV-TV. Certified under the LEEDrating system, the
building was named after Las Vegas Sun founder and publisher Hank
Greenspun. The Greenspun family also donated \$37 million to the total
cost of the building.

In 2008, the Sciences and Engineering Building opened. It was created to
serve both the College of Sciences and the Howard R. Hughes College of
Engineering in an environmentally friendly manner.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.6666666666666665in"}\
*The Thomas and Mack Center and adjoining Cox Pavilion house many of the
university's athletic teams.*

Athletics
=========

-   *UNLV is also known for its golf program.*

-   *UNLV has many traditions in its athletic programs.*

-   *Each year, the men's football team plays the Nevada Wolf Pack in a
    football game called the Battle for Nevada.*

-   *UNLV trails Nevada in the series 17-24 after winning the 2015
    contest in Reno 23-17.*

-   *UNLV is most known for its men's basketball program.*

UNLV supports varsity teams in 17 different sports. The men's basketball
team is referred to as the Runnin' Rebels and the men's baseball team is
referred to as the Hustlin' Rebels. The Rebels are a founding member of
the Mountain West Conference, in the NCAA's Division I. The only
exceptions are the UNLV men's soccer team and swim and dive team, which
compete in the Western Athletic Conference.

The school's official colors of scarlet and gray can be traced to the
late-1950s, when UNLV adopted as mascot a wolf wearing a Confederate
uniform. Scarlet and gray were traditional colors of the Confederacy
with its gray uniforms and red-based flag. UNLV's mascot is Hey Reb, the
toned-down version of the original mascot named Beauregard, which was a
wolf character dressed in Confederate hat and uniform. UNLV's Hey Reb
mascot made his debut in 1983. He received his first makeover in 1997
and second in 2009. Named one of 12 All-American Mascots, he competed
for the title of 2004 Capital One Mascot of the Year and made a strong
showing by coming in second in online voting. No stranger to national
television, Hey Reb has also appeared in two memorable ESPN SportsCenter
commercials.

UNLV has many traditions in its athletic programs. Each year, the men's
football team plays the Nevada Wolf Pack in a football game called the
Battle for Nevada. The trophy for that game is the Fremont Cannon. Built
by the Kennecott Copper Corp., Nevada Mines Division, the cannon is
valued at more than \$10,000 and is considered one of the best, and
loudest, symbols of rivalry in college football. UNLV trails Nevada in
the series 17-24 after winning the 2015 contest in Reno 23-17.

UNLV is most known for its men's basketball program. Made famous by
Coach Jerry Tarkanian in the 1970s–1990s, the Runnin' Rebels are the
third-most winning team in Division I basketball history by percentage,
only behind Kentucky and North Carolina (.713, 1037-418 through 2008).
The UNLV team is well known for their 1990 NCAA Men's Division I
Basketball Championship by defeating Duke University 103-73, which was
and still is the largest margin of victory in a championship game. In
that same game, UNLV became the first team to break 100 points in a
championship game.

UNLV is also known for its golf program. Led by coach Dwaine Knight, the
UNLV golf program has turned out PGA Tour pros such as Adam Scott, Chris
Riley, Chad Campbell, Ryan Moore, Skip Kendall, Charlie Hoffman, Bill
Lunde, and Andres Gonzales. They won the NCAA Division I Men's National
Golf Championship in 1998.\
In February 2011, the Rebel men's swimming and diving team won their
seventh-straight Mountain West Conference titles. Three Rebel swimmers
competed in the 2008 Beijing Olympics; Joe Bartoch and Richard Hortness
represented Canada and Jonas Anderson represented Sweden.

Faculty
=======

-   *Notable faculty include:*

Notable faculty include:

Alumni
======

-   *UNLV has seen many of its former students go on to local and
    national prominence.*

-   *Suge Knight, entrepreneur and CEO of Death Row Records, also played
    football at UNLV*

-   *UNLV has also produced politicians, including:*

UNLV has seen many of its former students go on to local and national
prominence. This includes many athletes who have excelled at the
collegiate and professional levels.

Former Rebels in the entertainment world include:

Chris Cox, Grammy Award nominated record producer and DJ

Tabitha and Napoleon D'umo, Emmy Award-winning choreographers

Guy Fieri, chef, restaurateur, and Food Network star

Ginger Fish, band member of Marilyn Manson

Brian Garth, sound engineer, producer, songwriter and guitarist for
American rock band Black Camaro

Ryan Higa, YouTube personality

Jimmy Kimmel, comedian, actor, and late-night talk show

Suge Knight, entrepreneur and CEO of Death Row Records, also played
football at UNLV

Tomi Lahren, American conservative political commentator, former host of
the show "Tomi" for TheBlaze

Kenny Mayne, ESPN personality

Tom Miller, artist, singer, and songwriter for American rock band Black
Camaro

Ronnie Vannucci, drummer for the American rock band The Killers

Eric Whitacre, Grammy Award-winning composer and conductor

Anthony E. Zuiker, creator and executive producer of the CSI television
series franchise

Dan "Tito" Davis, international fugitive and author

UNLV has also produced politicians, including:

Shelley Berkley, U.S. Congresswoman

John Ensign, U.S. Senator

Clark County District Attorney David Roger

Other notable alumni include:

Francis J. Beckwith, Christian philosopher

George J. Maloof, Jr., President of Maloof Hotels and former owner of
the Sacramento Kings

Gallery
=======

-   *UNLV's Science and Engineering Building*

-   *UNLV's School of Dental Medicine is located in the heart of Las
    Vegas' medical district.*

-   *"The Flashlight" by renowned sculptor Claes Oldenburg stands 38 ft
    tall and symbolizes UNLV as a "Beacon of Knowledge" in Southern
    Nevada.*

Aerial view of the main campus

The five-story Rod Lee Bigelow Health Sciences Building houses the
offices, classrooms, and laboratories for health physics, nursing,
radiological sciences, physical therapy, and kinesiology.

The glass wall of the Robert L. Bigelow Physics Building was built in
the shape of a sine wave, while banners inside represent the colors of
the spectrum.

The Boyd School of Law facilities include the state's largest law
library and the Thomas and Mack Moot Court.

UNLV's Science and Engineering Building

"The Flashlight" by renowned sculptor Claes Oldenburg stands 38 ft tall
and symbolizes UNLV as a "Beacon of Knowledge" in Southern Nevada.

UNLV's School of Dental Medicine is located in the heart of Las Vegas'
medical district. In addition to training dental professionals, the
school provides dental services to Southern Nevadans.

Beam Hall is home to the colleges of Business and Hotel Administration.

The University Libraries attract scholars from around the globe with the
most comprehensive collection of documents related to the history of
gaming in the world.

A view through the windows of Lied Library. The library holds more than
a million volumes and has 2,500 study spaces.

The Carol C. Harter Classroom Building Complex holds more classrooms
than any other building on campus.

The new Science and Engineering Building includes flexible laboratory
and teaching spaces, offices, high-tech conference rooms, and integrated
research areas.

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Official website*

Official website
