**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United%20States%20Ambassadors%20appointed%20by%20Donald%20Trump\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

United States Ambassadors appointed by Donald Trump
===================================================

-   *The rules of the Senate require that when the term of a Senate
    expires (in the case of the 115th Congress, on January 2, 2019),
    nominations then pending lapse and are returned to the president,
    who can resubmit them to the new Congress.*

-   *Regardless, all ambassadors must be formally appointed by the
    president and confirmed by the Senate.*

-   *This is a list of United States ambassadors appointed by the 45th
    president of the United States, Donald Trump.*

This is a list of United States ambassadors appointed by the 45th
president of the United States, Donald Trump.

Ambassadorships are often used as a form of political patronage to
reward high-profile or important supporters of the President. The most
visible ambassadorships are often distributed either in this way or to
the President's ideological or partisan confreres. Most ambassadorships,
however, are assigned to Foreign Service Officers who have spent their
career in the State Department. Regardless, all ambassadors must be
formally appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. While
all ambassadors serve at the president's pleasure and may be dismissed
at any time, career diplomats usually serve tours of roughly three years
before receiving a new assignment, and political appointees customarily
tender their resignations upon the inauguration of a new president.

The rules of the Senate require that when the term of a Senate expires
(in the case of the 115th Congress, on January 2, 2019), nominations
then pending lapse and are returned to the president, who can resubmit
them to the new Congress.

Color key
=========

-   *     Denotes appointees confirmed by the Senate.*

     Denotes appointees confirmed by the Senate.

     Denotes appointees awaiting Senate confirmation.

     Denotes appointees serving in an acting capacity.

     Denotes appointees who have left office or offices which have been
disbanded.

     Denotes nominees and appointees who are career Foreign Service
Officers

Ambassadors to foreign states
=============================

Americas
========

Africa
======

Middle East
===========

Asia
====

Europe
======

Oceania
=======

Ambassadors to international organizations
==========================================

Ambassador and representatives to the United Nations and related organizations
==============================================================================

Ambassadors and representatives to other international organizations
====================================================================

Ambassadors-at-Large
====================

References
==========
