**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United%20States%20District%20Court%20for%20the%20District%20of%20Columbia\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

United States District Court for the District of Columbia
=========================================================

-   *is a federal district court.*

-   *The United States District Court for the District of Columbia (in
    case citations, D.D.C.)*

-   *Appeals from the District are taken to the United States Court of
    Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit (except for patent
    claims and claims against the U.S. government under the Tucker Act,
    which are appealed to the Federal Circuit).*

The United States District Court for the District of Columbia (in case
citations, D.D.C.) is a federal district court. Appeals from the
District are taken to the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia Circuit (except for patent claims and claims
against the U.S. government under the Tucker Act, which are appealed to
the Federal Circuit).

History
=======

-   *In 1936, Congress renamed the court the District Court of the
    United States for the District of Columbia.*

-   *The court was established by Congress in 1863 as the Supreme Court
    of the District of Columbia, replacing the abolished circuit and
    district courts of the District of Columbia that had been in place
    since 1801.*

The court was established by Congress in 1863 as the Supreme Court of
the District of Columbia, replacing the abolished circuit and district
courts of the District of Columbia that had been in place since 1801.
The court consisted of four justices, including a chief justice, and was
granted the same powers and jurisdiction as the earlier circuit court.
Any of the justices could convene a United States circuit court or a
local criminal court. In 1936, Congress renamed the court the District
Court of the United States for the District of Columbia. Its current
name was adopted in 1948, and from then on justices were known as
judges.

Originally housed in the former District of Columbia City Hall, the
court now sits in the E. Barrett Prettyman Federal Courthouse located at
333 Constitution Avenue, Northwest, Washington, D.C. The District has no
local district attorney or equivalent, and so local prosecutorial
matters also fall into the jurisdiction of the United States Attorney
for the District of Columbia. Assistant United States Attorneys (AUSAs)
are tasked with prosecution of not only federal crimes but also crimes
that would normally be left to the state prosecutor's discretion.
Because of this the District has the largest U.S. Attorney's Office in
the nation, with around 250 AUSAs.

Current judges
==============

-   *As of May 22, 2019\[update\]:*

As of May 22, 2019\[update\]:

Former judges
=============

Chief judges
============

-   *Chief judges have administrative responsibilities with respect to
    their district court.*

-   *To be chief, a judge must have been in active service on the court
    for at least one year, be under the age of 65, and have not
    previously served as chief judge.*

-   *Unlike the Supreme Court, where one justice is specifically
    nominated to be chief, the office of chief judge rotates among the
    district court judges.*

Chief judges have administrative responsibilities with respect to their
district court. Unlike the Supreme Court, where one justice is
specifically nominated to be chief, the office of chief judge rotates
among the district court judges. To be chief, a judge must have been in
active service on the court for at least one year, be under the age of
65, and have not previously served as chief judge. A vacancy is filled
by the judge highest in seniority among the group of qualified judges.
The chief judge serves for a term of seven years or until age 70,
whichever occurs first. The age restrictions are waived if no members of
the court would otherwise be qualified for the position.

When the office was created in 1948, the chief judge was the
longest-serving judge who had not elected to retire on what has since
1958 been known as senior status or declined to serve as chief judge.
After August 6, 1959, judges could not become or remain chief after
turning 70 years old. The current rules have been in operation since
October 1, 1982.

Succession of seats
===================

-   *Chief Justice Laws was assigned to the new Seat 13 by operation of
    law upon the abolition of the Chief Justice Seat 1.*

Associate Justices Clabaugh, McCoy, Wheat and Laws were elevated to
Chief Justice.

Chief Justice Laws was assigned to the new Seat 13 by operation of law
upon the abolition of the Chief Justice Seat 1.

See also
========

-   *List of United States federal courthouses in the District of
    Columbia*

-   *List of current United States District Judges*

Courts of the United States

List of current United States District Judges

List of United States federal courthouses in the District of Columbia

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia Official Website*

U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia Official Website

Official Courthouse History

Federal Judicial Center's History of the Court
