**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Walter\_Kaufmann\_%28physicist%29\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Walter Kaufmann (physicist)
===========================

-   *He is best known for the first experimental proof of the velocity
    dependence of mass, which was an important contribution to the
    development of modern physics, including special relativity.*

-   *Walter Kaufmann (June 5, 1871 – January 1, 1947) was a German
    physicist.*

Walter Kaufmann (June 5, 1871 – January 1, 1947) was a German physicist.
He is best known for the first experimental proof of the velocity
dependence of mass, which was an important contribution to the
development of modern physics, including special relativity.

Life
====

-   *Kaufmann habilitated in 1899 and became a professor extraordinarius
    of physics in at the University of Bonn.*

-   *Of Jewish descent, in 1890/91 Kaufmann studied mechanical
    engineering at the technical universities of Berlin and Munich.*

Of Jewish descent, in 1890/91 Kaufmann studied mechanical engineering at
the technical universities of Berlin and Munich. From 1892 he studied
physics at the Universities of Berlin and Munich, attaining a doctorate
in 1894. From 1896 he was an assistant at the physical institutes of the
Universities of Berlin and Göttingen. Kaufmann habilitated in 1899 and
became a professor extraordinarius of physics in at the University of
Bonn. After further work at the Berliner Physikalisches Institut he
became professor ordinarius for experimental physics and leader of the
physical institute at the Albertina in Königsberg, where he taught until
he retired in 1935. Later, he was guest lecturer at the University of
Freiburg.

Measurements of velocity dependence of mass
===========================================

-   *Therefore, he spoke of the "Lorentz-Einstein" theory.*

-   *It is notable that Kaufmann himself interpreted his experimental
    results as confirmation of Abraham's theory, refuting the
    Lorentz-Einstein principle of relativity.*

-   *At the end of 1905 Kaufmann carried out more accurate
    measurements.*

-   *Kaufmann's early work (1901–1903) confirmed for the first time the
    velocity dependence of the electromagnetic mass (later called
    relativistic mass) of the electron.*

Kaufmann's early work (1901–1903) confirmed for the first time the
velocity dependence of the electromagnetic mass (later called
relativistic mass) of the electron. However, the measurements were not
accurate enough to differentiate between the Lorentz ether theory and
that of Max Abraham.

At the end of 1905 Kaufmann carried out more accurate measurements. He
was the first to discuss Albert Einstein's theory of special relativity
and argued that, although Einstein's theory is based on quite different
conditions and is logically more satisfying, it is observationally
equivalent to Lorentz's theory. Therefore, he spoke of the
"Lorentz-Einstein" theory. It is notable that Kaufmann himself
interpreted his experimental results as confirmation of Abraham's
theory, refuting the Lorentz-Einstein principle of relativity. For some
years this weighed heavily against the latter. However, Kaufmann's
results were criticized by Max Planck, Adolf Bestelmeyer (1906) and
Walter Ritz (1908). The experiments were repeated by Alfred Bucherer
(1908), Neumann (1914) and others, with results which appeared to
confirm the Lorentz-Einstein theory and to disprove that of Abraham.
However, it was pointed out later that the results were not accurate
enough to distinguish between the theories. The uncertainty continued
until 1940, when such experiments were accurate enough to rule out
competing models. Today, the relativistic Lorentz-Einstein relations for
momentum and energy are confirmed routinely in particle accelerators,
see Tests of relativistic energy and momentum.

Note, however, that this uncertainty concerned only the relativistic
mass of the electron. Even in 1917, investigations of the fine structure
of the hydrogen lines provided confirmation of the Lorentz-Einstein
formula, contradicting that of Abraham.

See also
========

-   *History of special relativity*

History of special relativity

References
==========

Publications
============

External links
==============

-   *Zeittafel (timetable about physics)*

-   *The Kaufmann Experiments (Power point presentation)*

The Kaufmann Experiments (Power point presentation)

http://www-atm.jst.go.jp:8080/16030302\_1.html (Japanese)

Viaje medios de comunicación compras at itfisica.net at itfisica.net
(Italian)

Zeittafel (timetable about physics)
