**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William%20E.%20Harbour\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

William E. Harbour
==================

-   *William E. Harbour is an American civil rights activist who
    participated in the Freedom Rides.*

William E. Harbour is an American civil rights activist who participated
in the Freedom Rides. He was one of several youth activists involved in
the latter actions, along with John Lewis, William Barbee, Paul Brooks,
Charles Butler, Allen Cason, Catherine Burks, and Lucretia Collins.

Early life and education
========================

-   *Following a rejection by Jackson State University in 1960, he was
    able to fulfill this dream upon admission to Tennessee State
    University the following year.*

-   *Harbour was born into a black family in Piedmont, Alabama.*

-   *Although his father hoped that he would take over the barbershop,
    Harbour was determined to become the first person in his family to
    attend college.*

Harbour was born into a black family in Piedmont, Alabama. His father
was a cotton mill worker at the Standard Coosa Thatcher mill and the
owner of the OK Barbershop — Piedmont’s only black barbershop —, while
his mother worked as a cook to local white families.

Although his father hoped that he would take over the barbershop,
Harbour was determined to become the first person in his family to
attend college. Following a rejection by Jackson State University in
1960, he was able to fulfill this dream upon admission to Tennessee
State University the following year.

![](media/image1.jpg){width="5.5in" height="3.2358333333333333in"}

Civil Rights activism
=====================

-   *Although he survived the resultant riot (and subsequent
    imprisonment in Jackson), upon return to Tennessee he and 14 other
    students were expelled from Tennessee State University due to their
    involvement in the civil rights movement.*

-   *While at the university, he participated in numerous acts of civil
    disobedience, including "sit-in, stand-in, picketing and marching
    activities as a function of the civil rights movement."*

Soon after arriving in Tennessee, Harbour joined the Student Central
Committee of the Nashville Christian Leadership Council at the behest of
John Lewis, a fellow activist and close friend (the two had met on a bus
ride to a rally in Rock Hill, South Carolina). While at the university,
he participated in numerous acts of civil disobedience, including
"sit-in, stand-in, picketing and marching activities as a function of
the civil rights movement." His activism brought him to Rock Hill, SC
where he served jail time with other students imprisoned after a lunch
counter sit-in.

Out of a large number of volunteers, Harbour was one of only a few
selected to take part in the first Freedom Rides; other participants
included seven blacks — John Lewis, William Barbee, Paul Brooks, Charles
Butler, Allen Cason Jr., Catherine Burks and Lucretia Collins —, and two
whites — James Zwerg and Salynn McCollum. Harbour’s involvement led to
him being arrested twice in rapid succession. The first arrest occurred
in Montgomery at the tail end of a Nashville (17 May) – Montgomery (21
May) Freedom Ride. The second arrest occurred on 28 May 1961 at the end
of a Nashville (via Memphis) – Jackson, Mississippi Freedom Ride, and
resulted in Harbour being imprisoned for 30 days.

In Montgomery, Harbour was the first activist to exit the bus as it
arrived at the Montgomery Greyhound Bus Station — and thus the first to
encounter the waiting mob. Although he survived the resultant riot (and
subsequent imprisonment in Jackson), upon return to Tennessee he and 14
other students were expelled from Tennessee State University due to
their involvement in the civil rights movement.

While Harbour’s difficulties were far from unique, the pattern of
"brutality and jail terms" which he and his fellow activists encountered
not only strengthened the Freedom Riders’ resolve, but also increased
publicity and motivated others to join them.

After the Freedom Ride
======================

-   *Currently a resident of Atlanta, Georgia, Harbour remains "an
    active alumnus" of Tennessee State University.*

-   *Following his expulsion from Tennessee State University, Harbour’s
    mother advised him against returning to Piedmont due to fear for his
    safety.*

-   *In late 1961, Harbour was reinstated to Tennessee State
    University.*

Following his expulsion from Tennessee State University, Harbour’s
mother advised him against returning to Piedmont due to fear for his
safety. Consequently, from 1961 to 1966 he made only "one brief visit"
home.

In late 1961, Harbour was reinstated to Tennessee State University.
After a short stint as a Georgia school teacher, and a period of
involvement in the "War on Poverty" under President Johnson, he became a
federal civil servant "specializing in U.S. Army base closings".

Currently a resident of Atlanta, Georgia, Harbour remains "an active
alumnus" of Tennessee State University. The Atlanta Alumni Association
sponsors a scholarship named in his honor, The William E. Harbour
Academic Scholarship.

References
==========
