**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wolf\_WR7\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Wolf WR7
========

-   *The cars were driven by 1976 champion James Hunt and Keke Rosberg.*

-   *The Wolf WR7 was a Formula One car built for the 1979 season by the
    Walter Wolf Racing team.*

The Wolf WR7 was a Formula One car built for the 1979 season by the
Walter Wolf Racing team. Three examples of the car were produced. The
first was WR7. A second car, WR8, was built to the same specification,
while a slightly modified car, WR9, first appeared at the British Grand
Prix. The cars were driven by 1976 champion James Hunt and Keke Rosberg.
The engine was a Ford Cosworth DFV.

Competition history
===================

-   *At the end of the 1979 Formula One season, Walter Wolf, owner of
    the team, pulled out of Formula One and sold the assets of his
    organisation to Wilson and Emerson Fittipaldi for the use of their
    Fittipaldi Automotive team.*

-   *The WR7 cars were raced as Fittipaldi F7s in the early part of the
    1980 Formula One season by Emerson Fittipaldi and Rosberg.*

The car was designed by Harvey Postlethwaite, previously responsible for
the Hesketh 308 in which James Hunt won his first race. Wolf's former
driver Jody Scheckter left the team at the end of 1978, going to
Ferrari, where he would win the World Championship. He was replaced by
1976 champion James Hunt. When it was found that Hunt was unable to fit
into the Wolf WR5/6 chassis, a new car had to be built in a haste prior
to the season opener in Argentina. The cars proved unreliable and
uncompetitive, with Hunt only finishing one of his six races in WR7 and
WR8. The assertion made by Motor Sport magazine ahead of the season that
Hunt was a driver likely to "quickly lose interest" when not provided
with a competitive machine proved right when he left the team (and the
sport) after the 1979 Monaco Grand Prix. Keke Rosberg took over his
drive for the remainder of the season, but also only finished one race.
Rosberg crashed WR9 heavily during qualifying for the Canadian Grand
Prix so a hybrid car using WR8's monocoque, dubbed WR8/9 was built up
for his use in the USA.

At the end of the 1979 Formula One season, Walter Wolf, owner of the
team, pulled out of Formula One and sold the assets of his organisation
to Wilson and Emerson Fittipaldi for the use of their Fittipaldi
Automotive team. The WR7 cars were raced as Fittipaldi F7s in the early
part of the 1980 Formula One season by Emerson Fittipaldi and Rosberg.

Complete Formula One World Championship results
===============================================

-   *(key) (results in bold indicate pole position; results in italics
    indicate fastest lap)*

(key) (results in bold indicate pole position; results in italics
indicate fastest lap)

References
==========
