**From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia**

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Workplace%20democracy\
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0:\
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Text\_of\_Creative\_Commons\_Attribution-ShareAlike\_3.0\_Unported\_License

Workplace democracy
===================

-   *Workplace democracy is the application of democracy in all its
    forms (including voting systems, debates, democratic structuring,
    due process, adversarial process, systems of appeal) to the
    workplace.*

-   *Workplace democracy can be anything from direct democracy to
    employers asking opinions of employees without taking into
    consideration their beliefs and opinions.*

Workplace democracy is the application of democracy in all its forms
(including voting systems, debates, democratic structuring, due process,
adversarial process, systems of appeal) to the workplace.

Workplace democracy is implemented in a variety of ways, dependent on
the size, culture, and other variables of an organization. Workplace
democracy can be anything from direct democracy to employers asking
opinions of employees without taking into consideration their beliefs
and opinions.

Advantages/Arguments for
========================

Economic argument
=================

-   *Success of the employee-owned and operated Mondragon suggests
    economic benefits from workplace democracy.*

From as early as the 1920s, scholars have been exploring the idea of
increasing employee participation and involvement. They sought to learn
if whether including employees in organizational decision-making would
lead to increased effectiveness and productivity within the
organization. According to Lewin, individuals who are involved in
decision-making also have increased openness to change. Different
participative techniques can have either a stronger impact on morale
than productivity, while others have the reverse effect. Success of the
employee-owned and operated Mondragon suggests economic benefits from
workplace democracy.

Citizenship argument
====================

-   *Skills developed from democracy in the workplace can transfer to
    improved citizenship and result in a better functioning democracy.*

-   *Workplace democracy acts as an agent to encourage public
    participation in a government's political process.*

Workplace democracy acts as an agent to encourage public participation
in a government's political process. Skills developed from democracy in
the workplace can transfer to improved citizenship and result in a
better functioning democracy. Workers in a democratic environment may
also develop a greater concern from the common good, which also
transfers to fundamental citizenship.

Ethical justification
=====================

-   *Philosopher Robert Dahl claims that 'if democracy is justified in
    governing the state, it must also be justified in governing economic
    enterprises'.*

-   *Making workplaces more democratic is the "right" thing to do.*

Making workplaces more democratic is the "right" thing to do.
Philosopher Robert Dahl claims that 'if democracy is justified in
governing the state, it must also be justified in governing economic
enterprises'.

Employee power and representation
=================================

-   *When workplace democracy is used the effect typically is raised
    employee potential, employee representation, higher autonomy, and
    equal power within an organization (Rolfsen, 2011).*

Workers working for democratic leaders report positive results such as
group member satisfaction, friendliness, group mindedness, 'we'
statements, worker motivation, creativity, and dedication to decisions
made within an organization.

When workplace democracy is used the effect typically is raised employee
potential, employee representation, higher autonomy, and equal power
within an organization (Rolfsen, 2011).

Political association
=====================

-   *Historically, some unions have been more committed to workplace
    democracy than others.*

-   *The Democratic socialist parties have supported the notion of
    workplace democracy and democratically controlled institutions.*

-   *Workplace democracy theory closely follows political democracy,
    especially in larger workplaces.*

Workplace democracy theory closely follows political democracy,
especially in larger workplaces. Democratic workplace organization is
often associated with trade unions, anarchist, and socialist movements.
Most unions have democratic structures at least for selecting the
leader, and sometimes these are seen as providing the only democratic
aspects to the workplace. However, not every workplace that lacks a
union lacks democracy, and not every workplace that has a union
necessarily has a democratic way to resolve disputes

Historically, some unions have been more committed to workplace
democracy than others. The Industrial Workers of the World pioneered the
archetypal workplace democracy model, the Wobbly Shop, in which
recallable delegates were elected by workers, and other norms of
grassroots democracy were applied. This is still used in some
organizations, notably Semco and in the software industry.

Spanish anarchists, Mohandas Gandhi's Swadeshi movement, farm and retail
co-operative movements, all made contributions to the theory and
practice of workplace democracy and often carried that into the
political arena as a "more participatory democracy." The Green parties
worldwide have adopted workplace democracy as a central platform, and
also often mimic workplace democracy norms such as gender equity,
co-leadership, deliberative democracy applied to any major decision, and
leaders who don't do policy. The Democratic socialist parties have
supported the notion of workplace democracy and democratically
controlled institutions.

The best known and most studied example of a successfully democratic
national labor union in the United States are the United Electrical,
Radio and Machine Workers of America,\[citation needed\] known
throughout the labor movement as the UE. An independent trade Union, the
UE was built from the bottom-up, and takes pride in its motto that "The
Members Run This Union!"

In Sweden, the Swedish Social Democratic Party made laws and reforms
from 1950-70 to establish more democratic workplaces.

Salvador Allende championed a large number of such experiments in Chile
when he became president of Chile in 1970.

Studies by management science
=============================

-   *There are many management science papers on the application of
    democratic structuring to the workplace, and its benefits.*

-   *One such international study of more than 50 different democratic
    companies discovered that a minimum of six specific organizational
    components (including political, economic, psychological and
    juridical processes) were all equally necessary if the democratic
    functioning of management systems was to last over the long term.*

-   *He held up the workplace democracy model advanced by Ricardo Semler
    as the "only" one that actually took cognizance of human foibles.*

There are many management science papers on the application of
democratic structuring to the workplace, and its benefits. One such
international study of more than 50 different democratic companies
discovered that a minimum of six specific organizational components
(including political, economic, psychological and juridical processes)
were all equally necessary if the democratic functioning of management
systems was to last over the long term.

Benefits are often contrasted to simple command hierarchy arrangements
in which "the boss" can hire anyone and fire anyone, and takes absolute
and total responsibility for his own well-being and also all that occurs
"under" him. The command hierarchy is a preferred management style
followed in many companies for its simplicity, speed and low process
overheads.

London Business School chief, Nigel Nicholson, in his 1998 Harvard
Business Review paper: "How Hardwired is Human Behavior?" suggested that
human nature was just as likely to cause problems in the workplace as in
larger social and political settings, and that similar methods were
required to deal with stressful situations and difficult problems. He
held up the workplace democracy model advanced by Ricardo Semler as the
"only" one that actually took cognizance of human foibles.

Influenced matrix management
============================

-   *Managerial grid models and matrix management, compromises between
    true workplace democracy and conventional top-down hierarchy, became
    common in the 1990s.*

Managerial grid models and matrix management, compromises between true
workplace democracy and conventional top-down hierarchy, became common
in the 1990s. These models cross responsibilities so that no one manager
had total control of any one employee, or so that technical and
marketing management were not subordinated to each other but had to
argue out their concerns more mutually. A consequence of this was the
rise of learning organization theory, in which the ontology of
definitions in common among all factions or professions becomes the main
management problem.

Current approaches
==================

Limits on management
====================

-   *Much management philosophy has focused on trying to limit manager
    power, differentiate leadership versus management, and so on.*

-   *The comic strip Dilbert has become popular satirizing this type of
    oblivious management, iconically represented by the Pointy-haired
    Boss, a nameless and clueless social climber.*

Many\[quantify\] organizations began by the 1960s to realize that tight
control by too few people was encouraging groupthink, increasing
turnover in staff and a loss of morale among qualified people helpless
to appeal what they saw as misguided, uninformed, or poorly thought-out
decisions. Often\[quantify\] employees who publicly criticize such poor
decision making of their higher management are penalized or even fired
from their jobs on some pretext or other. The comic strip Dilbert has
become popular satirizing this type of oblivious management, iconically
represented by the Pointy-haired Boss, a nameless and clueless social
climber. The Dilbert principle has been accepted as fact by some.\[by
whom?\]

Much management philosophy has focused on trying to limit manager power,
differentiate leadership versus management, and so on. Henry Mintzberg,
Peter Drucker and Donella Meadows were three very notable theorists
addressing these concerns in the 1980s. Mintzberg and Drucker studied
how executives spent their time, Meadows how change and leverage to
resist it existed at all levels in all kinds of organizations.

Adhocracy, functional leadership models and reengineering were all
attempts to detect and remove administrative incompetence. Business
process and quality management methods in general remove managerial
flexibility that is often perceived as masking managerial mistakes, but
also preventing transparency and facilitating fraud, as in the case of
Enron. Had managers been more accountable to employees, it is
argued,\[by whom?\] owners and employees would not have been defrauded.

Codetermination
===============

-   *German law specifically mandates democratic worker participation in
    the oversight of workplaces with 2000 or more employees.*

German law specifically mandates democratic worker participation in the
oversight of workplaces with 2000 or more employees.

Examples of companies organized by workplace democracy
======================================================

Mondragon
=========

-   *The Mondragon Cooperative Corporation is the largest worker
    cooperative in the world, and as such the largest corporation that
    operates some form of workplace democracy.*

The Mondragon Cooperative Corporation is the largest worker cooperative
in the world, and as such the largest corporation that operates some
form of workplace democracy. The Marxian economist Richard D. Wolff
states it is "a stunningly successful alternative to the capitalist
organization of production".

Marland Mold
============

-   *Through all of this employees were also able to gain a broader
    perspective on the company, like being able to understand others
    views of different conflicts in the workplace.*

-   *The Marland Mold employees voted to join the International Union of
    Electrical Workers, because of a dispute that took place over health
    insurance.*

Marland Mold was a company started in 1946 in Pittsfield, Massachusetts,
by Severino Marchetto and Paul Ferland. The company at first, designed
and built steel molds for plastic products throughout the 1950's and
60's. In 1969 the owners sold the company to VCA which was later bought
by The Ethyl Corporation. The Marland Mold employees voted to join the
International Union of Electrical Workers, because of a dispute that
took place over health insurance. The plant's manager started to pay
less attention and put less time into the Pittsfield plant so the
profits declined. The plant was put up for sale in 1992. The employees
ended up buying out the plant, even though they weren't fans of employee
ownership before, they needed to save their jobs. There immediately was
a burst in production and they were able to produce molds that normally
took the 3000 hours to make in 2200 hours. They had financial stake in
the company now which gave them new motivation for the company's
success. The other two ideas that were key components to their success
was the education of all members about their new roles, and building an
ownership culture within the organization. In 1995, they had officially
bought all ownership stock and buyout lenders and the company was
completely employee owned. Through all of this employees were also able
to gain a broader perspective on the company, like being able to
understand others views of different conflicts in the workplace. In
2007, Marland Mold celebrated their 15th anniversary of employee
ownership.

In 2010 Marland Mold were acquired by Curtil. In 2017 the Pittsfield
plant was shut.

Semco
=====

-   *This radical approach to management got him and the company a great
    deal of attention.*

-   *Semler argued that handing the company over to the workers was the
    only way to free time for himself to go build up the customer,
    government and other relationships required to make the company
    grow.*

-   *All managerial decisions were subject to democratic review, debate
    and vote, with the full participation of all workers.*

In the 1980s, Brazilian businessman Ricardo Semler, converted his family
firm, a light manufacturing concern called Semco, and transformed it
into a strictly democratic establishment where managers were interviewed
and then elected by workers. All managerial decisions were subject to
democratic review, debate and vote, with the full participation of all
workers. This radical approach to management got him and the company a
great deal of attention. Semler argued that handing the company over to
the workers was the only way to free time for himself to go build up the
customer, government and other relationships required to make the
company grow. By literally giving up the fight to hold any control of
internals, Semler was able to focus on marketing, positioning, and offer
his advice (as a paid, elected spokesman, though his position as major
shareholder was not so negotiable) as if he were, effectively, an
outside management consultant hired by the company. Decentralization of
management functions, he claimed, gave him a combination of insider
information and outsider credibility, plus the legitimacy of truly
speaking for his workers in the same sense as an elected political
leader.

Criticism
=========

-   *Negative outcomes of the democratic organization of the workplace
    can include higher time commitments and lower efficiency.*

Negative outcomes of the democratic organization of the workplace can
include higher time commitments and lower efficiency.

See also
========

-   *Socialism*

Socialism

Syndicalism

Theory X and Theory Y

References
==========

External links
==============

-   *Workplace Democracy and Democratic Ownership—Richard Wolff & Gar
    Alperovitz at Left Forum, 2013.*

-   *Democracy at Work.*

-   *Quotes and other writings on workplace democracy (Chomsky,
    Wheatley, et al.)*

-   *News, analysis, and resources about workplace democracy*

-   *Articles by David Ellerman on workplace democracy*

News, analysis, and resources about workplace democracy

Quotes and other writings on workplace democracy (Chomsky, Wheatley, et
al.)

Articles by David Ellerman on workplace democracy

Democracy at Work. A social movement for a new economy founded by
Richard D. Wolff

Workplace Democracy and Democratic Ownership—Richard Wolff & Gar
Alperovitz at Left Forum, 2013.
